

1
Home
Chat
Events
The Dispatch
Events
Leaderboard
About
Update, 2/8/2024:Sold out! Theres a chance a few seats will open up so Ive set up a waitlisthere. If we can release more seats I will contact folks in the order they sign up for the waitlist.
Sold out! Theres a chance a few seats will open up so Ive set up a waitlist
. If we can release more seats I will contact folks in the order they sign up for the waitlist.
Im pleased to announce Ill be doing an event with Rob Henderson on Tuesday, February 20 atThe Village Undergroundin New York City to promote his bookTroubled, which comes out that very day. The event will occur from 6:00 p.m.7:30 p.m., and the publicity blurb is below. If you want to come, you can RSVP by filling out this Google Form and, as instructed there, sending me $25  the number of people in your party (max 8, as per venue rules) directly via PayPal, Venmo, or Zelle. If you reserve by the end of the day on Wednesday, February 14,your ticket cost will include a copy of the book for each member of your party, waiting for you when you arrive at the venue. What a deal! Youll be getting both a slightly discounted copy ofTroubled(relative to its current Amazon price)andan event with the author on top of it. The only downside is you have to see and hear me as well, but, you know, life is tough sometimes. (Also, theres a two-item-per-person minimum at the venue, so come hungry and/or thirsty.)
Im pleased to announce Ill be doing an event with Rob Henderson on Tuesday, February 20 at
in New York City to promote his book
, which comes out that very day. The event will occur from 6:00 p.m.7:30 p.m., and the publicity blurb is below. If you want to come, you can RSVP by filling out this Google Form and, as instructed there, sending me $25  the number of people in your party (max 8, as per venue rules) directly via PayPal, Venmo, or Zelle. If you reserve by the end of the day on Wednesday, February 14,
. What a deal! Youll be getting both a slightly discounted copy of
(relative to its current Amazon price)
an event with the author on top of it. The only downside is you have to see and hear me as well, but, you know, life is tough sometimes. (Also, theres a two-item-per-person minimum at the venue, so come hungry and/or thirsty.)
The Village Underground is awonderfuland classic space but does not have a traditional ticketing system. For various logistical reasons far too boring to get into here, including keeping the cost to you low, this PayPal/Venmo/Zelle system was our best bet. If this event sells out, Ill remove the link to the form and add an update to this page, so please refresh it before you buy your tickets. If anyone is able to sneak through after we sell out, I will of course promptly refund their ticket price and let them know what happened. All the money collected will go directly toward the cost of ordering the books, and any small surplus Ill either donate toGiveWellor the tab if we have an after-party at a nearby bar (one of the questions on the sign-up sheet gauges attendees interest in doing so).
The Village Underground is a
and classic space but does not have a traditional ticketing system. For various logistical reasons far too boring to get into here, including keeping the cost to you low, this PayPal/Venmo/Zelle system was our best bet. If this event sells out, Ill remove the link to the form and add an update to this page, so please refresh it before you buy your tickets. If anyone is able to sneak through after we sell out, I will of course promptly refund their ticket price and let them know what happened. All the money collected will go directly toward the cost of ordering the books, and any small surplus Ill either donate to
or the tab if we have an after-party at a nearby bar (one of the questions on the sign-up sheet gauges attendees interest in doing so).
Thank you! I hope to see some of you there. Capacity is ~170, so theres a chance this will fill up quickly.
***
BLURB:
Join Jesse Singal, co-host of the podcastBlocked and Reported, for a live interview with the psychologist and writer Rob Henderson about his debut book,Troubled: A Memoir of Foster Care, Family, and Social Class. The event will consist of brief introductory remarks from Jesse, followed by a conversation with Rob about his book and his experiences navigating elite academic and journalistic institutions that are increasingly hostile to people from backgrounds like his, with time for audience questions at the end. The $25 ticket fee will include a copy ofTroubledfor everyone who pays by the end of the day on Wednesday, February 14.
Join Jesse Singal, co-host of the podcast
, for a live interview with the psychologist and writer Rob Henderson about his debut book,
. The event will consist of brief introductory remarks from Jesse, followed by a conversation with Rob about his book and his experiences navigating elite academic and journalistic institutions that are increasingly hostile to people from backgrounds like his, with time for audience questions at the end. The $25 ticket fee will include a copy of
for everyone who pays by the end of the day on Wednesday, February 14.
Rob Hendersonis the author ofTroubled: A Memoir of Foster Care, Family, and Social Class. Once described as self-made byThe New York Times, he grew up in foster homes in California, served in the US Air Force, and received a BS from Yale and a PhD in psychology from the University of Cambridge. Robs writing has appeared inTheNew York Times,TheWall Street Journal, andTheBoston Globe, among other outlets, and his Substack newsletter is sent out each week to more than forty thousand subscribers.
is the author of
. Once described as self-made by
, he grew up in foster homes in California, served in the US Air Force, and received a BS from Yale and a PhD in psychology from the University of Cambridge. Robs writing has appeared in

,

, and

, among other outlets, and his Substack newsletter is sent out each week to more than forty thousand subscribers.
Jesse Singalis the co-host of the podcastBlocked and Reportedand the author ofThe Quick Fix: Why Fad Psychology Cant Cure Our Ills. He has more or less the same last line of his bio as Rob, although with fewer Substack subscribers.
is the co-host of the podcast
and the author of
. He has more or less the same last line of his bio as Rob, although with fewer Substack subscribers.
Subscribe
Top
Latest
Discussions

Jesse Singal

Jesse Singal

Jesse Singal

