

1
Book meeting
Book a meeting
Below is the second chapter of my forthcomingbook,Troubled: A Memoir of Foster Care, Family, and Social Class.
Below is the second chapter of my forthcoming
,
In case you missed it,hereis the preface andhereis chapter one.
In case you missed it,
is the preface and
is chapter one.
In this chapter, I share more defining events from my early life.
The first few chapters of my book describe a lost boy looking for a place of belonging, some kind of community of which I could truly become a part. For most of us, the first place (often the only place) we feel we belong is our own family. For me, that home place was shattered from the beginning by a deserting father and a drug addicted mother, both of whom were unable or unwilling to provide a stable home for me. Much ofTroubledexplores that abandonment, the many foster homes, the broken adoptive homes, and, later, my search for understanding the roots of all the dysfunction and deprivation that I and so many other children were mired in.
I wrote thisbookto illuminate the challenges children face when they live in impoverished and unstable environments. I used my experiences growing up as a foster kid as a way to shed light on the lingering effects of dysfunction and deprivation. We spend a lot of time focusing on the effects of poverty and low income for children, but I also wanted to underscore the detrimental effects of instability. And stress how we focus too much on the wrong end of the problem. We think the main issue is that not enough kids from marginalized backgrounds are going to college, not enough of them achieve upward mobility. And that is an issue we should focus on. But in addition, we should also be trying to ensure that fewer kids live through such harrowing experiences in the first place. Even if every kid goes on to attend a great college and earn a high income, that doesnt magically heal or compensate for the wounds or scars of their early life experiences. In addition to trying to help children from unstable backgrounds, we should try to ensure that fewer kids have those detrimental early life experiences in the first place. Alongside promoting educational attainment and earnings, we could also prioritize nurturing and attentive care for emotionally deprived young children.
I wrote this
to illuminate the challenges children face when they live in impoverished and unstable environments. I used my experiences growing up as a foster kid as a way to shed light on the lingering effects of dysfunction and deprivation. We spend a lot of time focusing on the effects of poverty and low income for children, but I also wanted to underscore the detrimental effects of instability. And stress how we focus too much on the wrong end of the problem. We think the main issue is that not enough kids from marginalized backgrounds are going to college, not enough of them achieve upward mobility. And that is an issue we should focus on. But in addition, we should also be trying to ensure that fewer kids live through such harrowing experiences in the first place. Even if every kid goes on to attend a great college and earn a high income, that doesnt magically heal or compensate for the wounds or scars of their early life experiences. In addition to trying to help children from unstable backgrounds, we should try to ensure that fewer kids have those detrimental early life experiences in the first place. Alongside promoting educational attainment and earnings, we could also prioritize nurturing and attentive care for emotionally deprived young children.
I hopeTroubledhelps you to capture, through some imaginative effort, the interior lives of kids in severely unstable surroundings.
Rob Henderson had an incredibly challenging upbringingraised as a foster kid in circumstances most children (thankfully) never know. His educational achievements are extraordinary. Whats more extraordinary is that hes a keen observer of both the world he came from and the world he now inhabits. He has learned the importance of family despite never having one of his own, and he delivers that message in a gripping way. Readthis book. It will challenge both your heart and mind. A rare feat.J.D. Vance, author ofHillbilly Elegy
Rob Henderson had an incredibly challenging upbringingraised as a foster kid in circumstances most children (thankfully) never know. His educational achievements are extraordinary. Whats more extraordinary is that hes a keen observer of both the world he came from and the world he now inhabits. He has learned the importance of family despite never having one of his own, and he delivers that message in a gripping way. Readthis book. It will challenge both your heart and mind. A rare feat.
Rob Henderson had an incredibly challenging upbringingraised as a foster kid in circumstances most children (thankfully) never know. His educational achievements are extraordinary. Whats more extraordinary is that hes a keen observer of both the world he came from and the world he now inhabits. He has learned the importance of family despite never having one of his own, and he delivers that message in a gripping way. Read
. It will challenge both your heart and mind. A rare feat.
J.D. Vance, author ofHillbilly Elegy
Pre-Order My Book
Pre-Order My Book
Melissa S. Kearney (Professor of Economics at Univ. of Maryland and author ofThe Two Parent Privilege) read an early copy ofTroubled. She recommended it recently on Bloomberg:
Chapter Two
I was outside feeding the dogs when Mrs. Martnez called through the kitchen window, We have to go to Mexico soon, and we cant take you with us. She opened the screen door to the backyard and stepped outside.You might have to go to another foster home.
Am I moving in with the people in the video? My new parents?
Within a week, I went from knowing where I was going to having
no idea.The sense of dread and loneliness returned. I kneeled down and petted one of the dogs as he ate, holding back tears.
Mr. and Mrs. Henderson. And no.Well, we dont know.Theyre trying to speed up the adoption process.But if they cant, youll have to go to another foster placement.
Will the Hendersons take me later?
We dont know, she said.Theyre coming to visit from Red Bluff. Youll get to meet them.
Mrs. Martnez wanted me to look my best for my meeting with this family that might adopt me. Most of my clothes were child-hood hand-me-downs from Mrs. Martnezs adult son. Some of the clothes were oversized.The shirts nearly came down to my knees, the sweater sleeves stretched beyond my hands, and I usu-ally had to roll up my pants.We went to Goodwill, which was exciting because it was the first time I went to a store to get clothes of my own.After Mrs. Martnez picked out some clothes that fit me properly, we went into a store that was freezing cold inside. I peered over the counter and saw a bunch of different colors in tubs.
What kind do you want? she asked. Is it candy? I asked.
She laughed.What? Ill just get you some vanilla. Do not spill any.
She ordered for both of us and handed me a cone with cold stuff inside. I saw her lick the stuff in her cone, so I did the same with mine. It was delicious. I bit into it.The icy temperature hurt my teeth.Curious,I poked my finger into it, holding it still.Then I pressed my cold finger to my cheek.
Its so cold, I said.
Mrs. Martnez looked over at me. Stop that! she snapped. You never had ice cream? You can tell the Hendersons that you had ice cream.
So, this was ice cream. Id seen other kids with it before.I took another bite of ice cream and part of it fell in my lap. Mrs. Martnez handed me a napkin. I was a messy eater, which she had mostly gotten used to. When I first moved in, she yelled at me because I ate too fast and used my shirt as a napkin. It was instinctual, though. In my previous foster homes, other kids sometimes took food right off our plates if we didnt eat it fast enough. Because of how I ate, my clothes were often stained, which annoyed my foster parents.

***

The Henderson parents looked like they did in the video. They spoke with Mrs. Martnez while I sat on the couch.After they fin-ished talking, they took me to a nearby park without her. I played on the jungle gym while they encouraged me. At some point I stopped and asked what I was supposed to call them.Mrs. Hender-son? I asked.
Honey, you can just call us Mom and Dad, she replied.
But Mrs. Martnez said you might not be my mom and dad, I said.
Did she? Dont worry about that,Robert.Or can we call you Rob, or Robbie? Dad said.
I dont mind, I said, swinging on the bars. Id nearly lost the ability to feel joy, but at this point, I felt a sense of guarded optimism. I trusted my new parentsmy new mom and dad. I briefly considered whether Mrs. Martnez was being truthful when she said I might be moving to another foster home, or if it was just an-other one of her cruelties. But my hopes lifted when Mrs. Martnez insisted on taking a photo of me with Mr. Carlos to say good-bye.
I smiled wanly as I glared at the hyperactive parrot, grateful Id never see him again.
Its funnyI thought of myself as such a tough kid. When I see children now, or photos of myself from childhood, it is plainly apparent to me that I carried a cross many sizes too large for someone that age.
Two weeks later, my bags were packed. I was going to move in with Mom and Dad. Gerri had brought Karen, a social worker from Chico (a town in Northern California near Red Bluff), with her. Gerri explained that Karen would be flying with me to join my new family. Gerri instructed me to make sure I behaved and to do well in school. I hugged her, not understanding that this was the last time I would ever see her. She was a rock in my life, the only person who I felt cared about me. I wish Id gotten to say a real good-bye.
How far are we going? I asked Karen.
Its quite a ways, kiddo. Its on an airplane, remember. She held her hand up, making a flying motion.
Where are we going? I asked. To your new home, silly, she said.
I think he means what town, Karen.Youre going to Red Bluff, Gerri said.
Is that in LA? I asked.
Both of the social workers smiled. No, sweetie, its not in LA.
They told me the flight would be over an hour. Id never been on an airplane before, and I was excited to see what it would be like. But shortly after takeoff, like Id always done when traveling to a new foster home, I fell asleep.

***

We landed in Sacramento, and there they were at the airport. I recognized my mom and dad immediately. Dad was holding my sister, who somehow looked even smaller than she did on the video I watched.
This is your new brother, Hannah, Mom said.Can you say hi? She said hi.
Hi, Hannah, Im Rob.
I couldnt believe she was four years oldshe looked three. Kids notice these things; mismatches between a kids size and age in ways that adults often dont.
Mom and Dad told me that the drive from the Sacramento airport to Red Bluff was another two hours or so. I rubbed my eyes, ready for another long trip.

***

My new sister, Hannah, was running in circles in the living room. Robbie, Im gonna show you something, she said.
Wed finally arrived in Red Bluff, to my new home. As I entered the house for the first time, I felt that familiar surge of heightened alertness; I was always a little jittery whenever I moved in with a new family. I expended a lot of nervous energy just trying to learn about my new environment for each foster placement. Usually, I wouldnt eat or sleep much for the first few days. This time it wasnt as intense, because I believed this would be the last placement Id ever have. But I was still anxious about being in a different environment. I wanted to exploreto learn more about my new surroundings.
It was a three-bedroom, one-and-a-half-bath house. Mom and Dad had moved into this house from a small apartment just before the adoption, they explained, because they wanted a family home for Hannah and me.
My sister led me to my bedroom, where there were a bunch of toys on the floor.
Oh wow! I said. Can we play with these?
These were mine. You can have them, she replied.
I picked up a yo-yo that lit up.Ive never played with one of these, I said, trying to figure out how to put the string on my finger. There was no loop tied, so I just tapped the side of the yo-yo, watching it light up.
Mom said you never had any toys before, she said. I was surprised at how well she spoke for a four-year-old. I barely talked at all when I was four.
Yeah. Sometimes Id go to my friends houses and play with their toys, I said, suddenly understanding that I wouldnt see my friends from LA anymore.
You can play with these ones now whenever you want, she said.
Thank you, I said. This act of kindness from my four-year-old sister is burned so deeply into my memory that I will never forget it. My foster siblings and other kids in LA could be mean. Food, toys, and adult attention were scarce resources, and so there was fierce competition. Plus, the other kids and I didnt always have a strong attachment to one another; we knew that at any moment we could be taken to another home or that a new kid would join us. Scarce resources plus environmental instability is not a recipe for prolonged kindness in young children. Still, I was often devastated when my foster siblings would have to leave or when Id have to leave them to go to another home.
I have a piggy bank, too. I collect change and sometimes Mom and Dad add coins, too.
We walked to her room, and she showed me a big piggy bank.
You can have half, she said. She was definitely the nicest kid Id ever met.
This was the strangest welcome to a new home Id ever experienced. It was overwhelming. I went back to my bedroom and closed the door. I didnt understand what I was feeling. I couldnt quite believe that I would be living with only one family now. One family, one sister, with the same people in the same house all the time. I was used to not knowing who would be in my house from one week to the next or where I would be living next. Id learned to stop thinking about the future, because I wanted to believe where I was living at the time would be where I would always be. Thinking anything else would make my heart beat really fast. Sitting on my bed in my new bedroom, I thought to myself, No more moving. Realizing that my sister and I would not be taken from each other filled me with unexpected joy.
For the first several months living with my new family, Id get really intense nightmares. In these dreams, Id wake up in my bedroom at the Martnezes house. Suddenly, I thought the adoption had been a dream. In the nightmare, I believed that what Mrs. Martnez had told me was true, that they were moving to Mexico. Shed tell me to pack a bag for my next foster placement. Then Id really bolt awake, my chest would be tight, and Id take deep breaths and walk to the kitchen to get a glass of water.

***

Throughout my first year with my new family in 1999,I learned that Red Bluff was way different than where Id come from. My adoptive hometown in Northern California is about 500 miles north of Los Angeles, 130 miles north of Sacramento, and smaller than either. The population of Red Bluff at that time was 13,147. Its situated in Tehama County, one of the poorest counties in the state. The median household income was $27,0291 (the median in California at the time was $61,137). Twenty-one percent of Red Bluff residents lived below the poverty line, and for those under age eighteen it was 29.6 percent. (The US child poverty rate at the time: 11 percent.) Red Bluff was mentioned once in an episode of Sons of Anarchy in 2009, suggesting that Charming, California (the fictional town in which the show was set), is located nearby.
Adults generally thought of Red Bluff as safe because it was relatively small and rural. Familiarity bred a false sense of security. The closest big city was Sacramento, a two-hour drive away. But Red Bluff wasnt safeit is consistently ranked as either the third or the fourth most dangerous city in California, typically right behind Oakland.The murder rate is three times higher than the US average, and the violent crime rate in Red Bluff is more than 50 percent higher than in Los Angeles.
The weather was different, too. Unlike Los Angeles, Red Bluff had seasons. It actually rained in wintertime, and in the summer, the temperature could get as hot as 120 degrees. I learned how dark my skin could get when I played outside without a shirt on. The car rides were shorter. In LA, it took forever to get anywhere. But in Red Bluff, Id get in the car with Mom and Dad, and wed be on the other side of town in less than fifteen minutes. There was one Taco Bell, one McDonalds, and one Burger King.We ate out a lot more than I did with any of my foster families. The Walmart in town had a generic little snack shop inside, later replaced by another Mc-Donalds, which wed also eat at a lot, especially on 29 Cent Tuesdays when they sold hamburgers for 29 cents each. There was one movie theater, with a 99 cent store next to it that was later replaced by a Dollar Tree.
And Red Bluff was much whiter. My adoptive mother (whom I was happy to call Mom) was born in South Korea, but she had been adopted by a white working-class family (my grandma and grandpa) when she was two years old. Dad, who was white, grew up in a family that was even poorer than Moms. In the LA Unified School District, my classmates were mostly Hispanic, with some Black kids, and a few white and Asian kids. In my new school, it was mostly white, with some Hispanic kids, and a few Black and Asian kids. But the poverty wasnt different. It seemed like most of the families, just like the ones I knew in LA, were barely getting by. Adults worked at the Sierra Pacific Lumber Mill, local businesses, or the Walmart Distribution Center. The ones who went to college were teachers or worked for the county. There werent many big chains besides Walmartno Supercuts, for example. Mom would take me to get a haircut at a local place that charged six dollars, and she always gave one extra dollar as a tip. They had a giant sign above the counter that read Clean hair is essential for a good haircut, which served as a reminder to squalid patrons who would sometimes visit.
Adults were always having car problems or worried about paying for gas, even though regular unleaded at the local Arco was 99 cents a gallon. Because of this, a lot of kids walked to school, and everywhere else, even though the streets werent always safe. There were tweakers, ex-cons, homeless people, and teenagers looking to get into mischief. There was a man covered in tattoos who would speed-walk all over town, yelling to himself. The other kids and I called him Schizo Joe. We got scared when we were walking and hed get close, and then laugh when he was far enough away. There was another guy we described as crazy who would wander around downtown, usually with a beer bottle in his hand. The other kids and I were afraid of him because he had FUCK THE WORLD tattooed on his forehead. Meth, weed, and prescription drugsopioids, mostlywere prevalent and not always hard to get. Most kids I knew didnt live with both of their parents.
Compared to Los Angeles, Red Bluff felt both richer and poorer at the same time. My immediate circumstances had improved, but the lives of those around me were the same as or worse than the kids Id known in LA.

***

I asked Mom to tell me the story of how theyd come to adopt me. Shed met Dad in the early 90s, she explained. Mom was working as a cashier at Petro, a local truck stop in Dunnigan, California (population: 897). Dad was working as a corrections officer at a prison when he and Mom got married. Mom quit her cashier job and they moved together into a fifth-wheel trailer, in a part of town that didnt even have telephone service. Mom described how she would communicate with other peopleher parents, mostly using a CB radio. Even as a child, I knew there was something odd about not having a phone and communicating with radios. All my foster homes had phones, and even in the old shows and movies on TV, people had phones. Mom said Dunnigan was, even for a small rural town, very poor.
One day at work, Dad had witnessed one of his superiors harassing a junior female corrections officer. Dad said he was conflicted because he knew the right thing to do was report him, but that there was an unspoken code at his work about not being a rat or a tattletale. In the end, he reported his boss. Shortly there-after, Dad quit his job and began working as a truck driver. He and Mom moved to a mobile home in Knights Landing, California (population: 968), which was about 112 miles from Red Bluff. Mom got another cashier job, this time at Kmart, and then later became a certified nursing assistant. Then Mom had gotten pregnant with Hannah, and she and Dad decided to move to Red Bluff, which was much larger and had more job opportunities compared with the towns they had come from.
A couple years after Hannah was born, they decided they wanted a second kid but didnt want to go through another pregnancy. They met with a social worker about adoption. The social worker told them she knew of a foster child who needed a home but wouldnt show them any photographs unless they were serious about adoption. They replied that they were indeed serious and, after reading and learning more about this kid, they agreed to meet him to learn more. Then the social worker showed them a picture of me. We knew we had to have you, Mom said.
Id never had a father figure in my life before, so having a dad was a new experience. Wed shoot hoops at a local park and wrestle around in the living room. He told me stories about his experience in the army when he had been stationed in Korea in the late 70s. Sometimes hed say how lucky he was to have missed Vietnam while holding his palm flat and ducking underneath. I didnt know what that meant and figured he just didnt want to visit Vietnam. Dad would teach me Korean words, and I thought it was funny that he knew how to speak Korean and Mom didnt, even though Dad was white and Mom was Korean. I would learn words from Dad and then tried to see if Mom knew what I was saying. She thought it was cute. They were proud of me for being able to learn the words so quickly. They were also impressed that I was doing well in school, because in the foster homes Id been such a poor student. Id finally gotten the stability I needed, and it was reflected in my improved grades. I surprised everyone by getting third place in my schools spelling bee, a marked difference from not being able to read eighteen months prior. Id grown to love reading, and I collected books that Mom and Dad would let me order from the Scholastic book catalogs my teachers handed out every few months. My favorites were Encyclopedia Brown, the Goosebumps series, and The Boxcar Children.
I liked the mysteries inside Goosebumps and Encyclopedia Brown books. I admired the way the boy detective Encyclopedia Brown used his smarts to find clues and figure out who the bad guy was. In The Boxcar Children, the characters were all orphaned kids who lived in an old, abandoned boxcar in the woods. I had something in common with these kids, which was why I liked the stories so much. The oldest boy was Henry, who always did the right thing and made sure to take care of the others. I thought he was the kind of big brother I would want, and the kind I should try to be. I especially liked a scene where the kids find a dump heap and pull out some teacups, an iron kettle, and spoonswhich they called treasure. The resourcefulness and curiosity of these kids inspired me. I felt alone in the world and learning about their self-sufficiency made me feel safer. If they could survive, then maybe I could, too.
There were rules at home that I had to get used to. Mom and Dad were Seventh-Day Adventists, and we went to church on Saturdays. Sometimes, though, if my sister and I complained enough, they would let us skip it. But Dad was very rigid about certain rules. Once at dinner, my sister talked about what they did in first grade that day.
We talked about our favorite word. Whats everyones favorite word? she asked.
Dad said,Do you want to know what my favorite word is? He paused. Jesus.
My sister nodded, and Mom didnt say anything.
A few days later, my sister and I were playing outside, and I said casually, Oh my God.
Dad overheard and told me to go to my room.
I went to my room. A few minutes later, Dad walked in and said, If you ever take the Lords name in vain again,I will hold you two inches above the ground and give you a beating. Do you under-stand me?
I nodded. Okay, Dad. I didnt know what Id done wrong, but I understood that he was serious. I swore all the time with other kidsmotherfucker was still my favorite wordand wondered what Dad would do if he found out about that.
Dad was a serious man. Once I got into trouble at school for shoving a kid in the lunch line, and the principal called my parents. When I got home, Dad told me to sit at the table and gave me a pencil and paper. I had to write the sentence I will not cause trouble one hundred times. After writing the sentence a few times, I switched to I wont cause trouble because it was a little bit shorter and easier to write. When I finally finished and gave the papers to Dad, he handed them back to me and said to write one hundred sentences properly this time.
On another occasion, my teacher called them and said I hadnt turned in my science project. Dad said he didnt even know Id had a science project. He told me to go to the living room and do one hundred push-ups. I could take breaks, he said, but I couldnt eat dinner until I had completed all one hundred. It took me most of the afternoon.
I asked why I had to do so many.
I know its tough, Robert. But you have to remember, Im an exsoldier boy, he replied.
Mom didnt like it, but she didnt stop it. One time I asked her, Why does Dad always make me do push-ups? She replied that Dad was worried because Id come from foster homes. He thought I would become a serious troublemaker, and that the best way to prevent this was through strict discipline. I didnt want to make Dad upset, so from then on I made sure not to get into trouble at school and to turn in all my assignments. I wanted Dad to like me, I didnt want to do more push-ups, and I wanted to prove him wrongto show him that I could be a good kid.
Dad later resumed working as a truck driver, so he was gone all week and came home on the weekends. One week for summer break I went with him. We drove all the way to Montana and back, stopping in different states and different truck stops like Petro along the way. I thought truck stops were cool. I liked looking at the trinkets and souvenirs of the different cities we were in. I learned that the interior of semi-trucks (not the trailers, the trucks themselves) often have bunk beds, a bathroom, and a small refrigerator. It was like a miniature motor home.
Dad also had a small portable black-and-white TV in the back of the truck ,and sometimes Id watch it if I was able to get a signal, but it usually didnt work. So, I spent most of the trip sitting in the passenger seat next to Dad. He bought me snacks and told me stories about his childhood while we listened to John Denver cassette tapes. He explained how he had grown up poor in a small rural area, somewhere in either California or Oregon (I dont remember which). He said that when he was a kid, they didnt have indoor plumbing until he started school, theyd never gone out to eat in a restaurant, and sometimes they had to go hunting or fishing for dinner. He pulled out an old black-and-white photograph of him and his family from the center console of the truck. In the photo, Dad was a teenager, and he was ripped. I asked him how he had a six-pack and he told me it was probably because he spent a lot of time outdoors working, and because they didnt always have much to eat. I asked why the man in the photograph looked different from Grandpa. He matter-of-factly explained that his birth father was an alcoholic and hurt Grandma and the others in the family. Grandma divorced him and remarried a much nicer man, whom Hannah and I knew as Grandpa.
On the way home, Dad told me how one time he had gotten into an argument over the phone with another guy. Dad invited the guy to come over to settle their disagreement. When Mom got home from work, she saw Dad and the other man fistfighting in the middle of the street. She was furious with him and threatened to leave. Thats when he stopped drinking alcohol and started drinking ODouls instead. I asked him if he was still ripped with a six-pack when he beat this guy up. He laughed and said he was too old by that point, gesturing toward his thinning hairline. I thought it was kind of cool that he used to fight people but was happy he didnt do it anymore. He said he loved me and Mom and Hannah, and he was grateful that we all now had a better life than hed had as a kid. I told him I was grateful that he was my dad.
In December, Mom and Dad kept asking me if I was excited that my birthday was coming up. I could tell they wanted me to be excited and say yes, so I did. But Id never done anything for my birthday beforenever had a cake or gotten any birthday presentsso in my mind I didnt have much to be excited about. On the day of, Mom and Dad said we were going to my maternal grandma and grandpas house. They lived in a town even smaller than Red Bluff. The drive to Grandma and Grandpas felt like an eternity, even though it was only about fifteen minutes. Time passes slowly for kids.
Grandma and Grandpa were religiouseven more religious than Mom and Dadand went to Seventh-Day Adventist church every Saturday no matter what. Grandma was blind and spent a lot of time reading the Bible in braille. Sometimes I would sit with her and she would read me stories like Noahs Ark. She also told me the story of how her father had died when she was a young girl. My great-grandpa John worked at a farm, rendering animal fat. One day while he was at work, a large bucket fell and hit him in the head, killing him instantly. After losing her father at just eleven years old, my grandmother became even more devoted to her faith.
As we walked into the house to see Grandma and Grandpa for my birthday, Dad was covering my eyes with his hands. Suddenly he removed them and I saw my grandparents, along with some of Moms extended family. In the middle of the living room was a big pile of wrapped birthday gifts.
These are mine? I asked.
Everyone assured me that they were mine. I said to everyone that I never got birthday presents before, and they replied that they were making up for it now. Hot Wheels cars, finger skateboards, dinosaur books. It was overwhelming. I didnt know what to play with first. I thanked everyone many times. Then they brought out a big cake. They sang Happy Birthday to me, which no one had ever done before either. I had to sing it in school sometimes to other kids in class, but nobody sang it to me because my birthday was during the holiday break.
After we finished up with the cake, Mom and Dad said they had another surprise for me. We walked outside and there was a Huffy bicycle. Theyd brought Hannahs bike and pulled it out of the car trunk so we could ride around together. Hannah was zipping around on her bike, and I felt self-conscious because I wasnt sure if I could ride like her. Id practiced a little on my friends bikes in the foster homes, but it was still hard for me to keep my balance.
I got the hang of it pretty fast. I felt the wind on my face as I pedaled harder, seeing how fast I could go. I couldnt believe I had all these toys. I wondered if Id always get presents on my birthday now.

***

One night around Christmastime, my sister and I were watching The Parent Trap, which we had rented. Mom and Dad let us pick out some snacks, too, which they never did because candy was expensive at Blockbuster. It was the second time Hannah and I were watching the movie. The first time, we watched it as a family, and Id kept asking how Lindsay Lohan could play two different people on the same screen. Mom and Dad said,Movie magic, kiddo.
I was still trying to figure it out when Mom walked into the room and paused the movie. I could tell she had been crying.
Hey, kids, Dad and I have to tell you something, she said. They sat on the couch. Hannah and I stayed on the floor. Dad looked vacant. I couldnt tell, but I thought maybe hed been crying, too.
We love you both so much, Mom said, while Dad nodded.
Mom went on to say that she and Dad were getting a divorce.
Then she burst into tears. My sister got up and sat with them. She sat between Mom and Dad, while they wept together. My sister was five, and Im not sure she knew what divorce meant. But she saw that Mom and Dad were tearing up and struggling with divulging this news to us.
I remained on the floor. I felt like the wind had been knocked out of me, but I couldnt cry. I was devastated, but I didnt know how to express it. The first couple of times I had to change families, I cried a lot. But now, nothing.The ability to feel my feelings and communicate them to others had been blunted.
This was the longest Id ever stayed with a familyover a year. I didnt know what was going to happen to me now, but I knew that our family was about to break apart, and part of me had always been dreading a day like this. None of my other families had lasted. In the past, Id always considered other kids who had real parents to be unusual. I saw them on TV, but those images did not reflect my life. My foster siblings and I were the normal ones. That was what I was used to, after all.That was my life. As I watched my new family cluster together, about to break apart, I thought about whether my life was the unusual one. And here it was changing yet again. Adults come and they go, I thought. They arent reliable. Not even Mom and Dad.

***

Mom moved across town into a gloomy duplex behind a local gas station, and Dad remained in the house. Hannah and I alternated weeks with them. One week wed stay with Mom at her house, the next wed stay with Dad at the house we knew. During the weeks I stayed with Mom, I hung out a lot with a kid named Sean. His mom, Alice, was friends with my mom. School got out around three oclock, and I would walk to Seans place and hang with him until Mom came to get me at five-thirty. The house was often crowded because Seans parents took care of some foster kids, too, some of whom were teenagers. I liked staying at Seans, and especially staying the night on weekends, because there werent really any rules. There were just too many kids for Alice and her husband, Jim, to keep track of what any of us were doing ,or to try to stop us for very long. It was funnyI was so happy to be done with foster homes after Mom and Dad adopted me. But here I was, glad to be hanging out in another one. After the splitting of my family, it was comforting to be in a familiar environment full of noisy kids.
Alice was Seans birth mom, but Jim was his stepdad. Sean told me he never saw his real dad after hed left his mom when he was little. Hes just a sperm donor. Jim is my real dad, Sean said. I liked Jim because he had cool tattoos and stayed up late with Sean and me on the weekends to watch WWF wrestlingThe Rock was our favorite. And Seans house had a Nintendo 64.We spent hours playing Mario Kart and Goldeneye and his parents didnt mind. It was sort of like 90s-era kids heaven. One day after school I saw Sean playing Pokmon on his new Game Boy Color.
Dude, I wish I had a Game Boy, I said.
He handed it over to me while he logged into a Yahoo chat-room. (This was one thing Seans parents did sometimes get strict about. They said if the kids were going to talk to strangers in chat-rooms, they could never give out any personal information. Sean just rolled his eyes.) He and his stepbrother showed me how to download music from Napster earlier that day. We listened to Blue (Da Ba Dee) by Eiffel 65 while I played Pokmon and Sean talked to strangers on the web.
Mom came to pick me up. I told her how much I wanted a Game Boy. Alice told Mom that they had kept Seans old original Game Boy, but the battery cover was missing. Mom bought it for twenty dollars. I noticed she and Dad were more willing to buy things for my sister and me since theyd split up. I thought Id have to wait until Christmas or my birthday to get an expensive gift like this, so I was ecstatic. I had to use Scotch tape to keep the 4 AA batteries inside, but I didnt mind. Sometimes Id switch the batteries from our TV remotes to my Game Boy so that Mom wouldnt know how much Id been playing. Like books, games took my mind off the divorce and how I was feeling. These distractions were calming.
Comments
Restacks
Frank Lee
Frank Lee
The Social Misfit Newsletter
The Social Misfit Newsletter
The Social Misfit Newsletter
Aug 25, 2023
Love this.   Rob, I think of you every time my family passes through Red Bluff on our way to our cabin at Lake Almanor.
Love this.   Rob, I think of you every time my family passes through Red Bluff on our way to our cabin at Lake Almanor.
Vivek Ramaswamy commented that his "privilege" in life was coming from a stable parental household.  People lacking that stability that make their way to a successful and happy life are maybe statistically rare; but strangely also seem to statistically dominate in top-level achievement.  I have friends from what I considered the most nurturing and caring parents that are dead now because they never amounted to anything and slid down a path of substance abuse and depression.  I have other friends that came from a mess of divorce, abuse and living with relatives, etc. that are very successful after being seemingly driven by the negative factors of their childhood experience.
Vivek Ramaswamy commented that his "privilege" in life was coming from a stable parental household.  People lacking that stability that make their way to a successful and happy life are maybe statistically rare; but strangely also seem to statistically dominate in top-level achievement.  I have friends from what I considered the most nurturing and caring parents that are dead now because they never amounted to anything and slid down a path of substance abuse and depression.  I have other friends that came from a mess of divorce, abuse and living with relatives, etc. that are very successful after being seemingly driven by the negative factors of their childhood experience.
Obviously individual personality, innate intelligence including emotional intelligence, and exposure to other people that might influence mindset and behavior... play a role in human development.   My view of these things is that trauma of a dysfunctional childhood cause a sort of waking and walking fog that can interfere with cognitive decision making... but that can also result in a narrowing of focus that contributes to success.  For example, a child with a strong and accomplished parent might struggle in developing with self-confidence and self-worth if unable to reach similar goals of accomplishment.  While a child with a sub-optimized parental upbringing, while dealing with the emotional scars for the lack of demonstrated love and attention (the "fog"), would lack the tug of insecurity trying to measure up to that highly-accomplished parent... and would not expect parental validation for accomplishment.
Obviously individual personality, innate intelligence including emotional intelligence, and exposure to other people that might influence mindset and behavior... play a role in human development.   My view of these things is that trauma of a dysfunctional childhood cause a sort of waking and walking fog that can interfere with cognitive decision making... but that can also result in a narrowing of focus that contributes to success.  For example, a child with a strong and accomplished parent might struggle in developing with self-confidence and self-worth if unable to reach similar goals of accomplishment.  While a child with a sub-optimized parental upbringing, while dealing with the emotional scars for the lack of demonstrated love and attention (the "fog"), would lack the tug of insecurity trying to measure up to that highly-accomplished parent... and would not expect parental validation for accomplishment.
I love Joseph Campbell's point that successful cultures have a common process of developing people along a continuum of mother's child, father's child and then adult.   I see this and agree with it... lacking the early childhood of a nurturing mother and/or the later tough-love of a rather... the child struggles becoming a well-functioning adult.   My recommendation for people dealing with deficits in these things are to learn to be their own mother and father.  Love and nurture themselves and self-apply tough love when needed.
I love Joseph Campbell's point that successful cultures have a common process of developing people along a continuum of mother's child, father's child and then adult.   I see this and agree with it... lacking the early childhood of a nurturing mother and/or the later tough-love of a rather... the child struggles becoming a well-functioning adult.   My recommendation for people dealing with deficits in these things are to learn to be their own mother and father.  Love and nurture themselves and self-apply tough love when needed.
That has been my approach for myself having a nurturing mother but a father that checked out with mental health problems and a step father that was a tyrant and more sibling rivalry than father.  I am my own father and a much better one than were the two losers my poor mother unfortunately hooked up with.
That has been my approach for myself having a nurturing mother but a father that checked out with mental health problems and a step father that was a tyrant and more sibling rivalry than father.  I am my own father and a much better one than were the two losers my poor mother unfortunately hooked up with.
Like (5)
Reply
Share
Jessica Raimi
Jessica Raimi
Aug 26, 2023
Im in suspense for the next chapter! Another Dickensian aspect of your story  its serialized.
Im in suspense for the next chapter! Another Dickensian aspect of your story  its serialized.
One of the many things I admire here is your recollection of your earlier ways of thinking  that you didnt know decoding the sounds of written words was a way to hear stories; that it hadnt occurred to you that Bill Nye had a whole life not shown on television. You often refer to television in your writing, but until this memoir I didnt know what a large part of your childhood it was  apparently much of your intellectual and social life before you became a reader.
One of the many things I admire here is your recollection of your earlier ways of thinking  that you didnt know decoding the sounds of written words was a way to hear stories; that it hadnt occurred to you that Bill Nye had a whole life not shown on television. You often refer to television in your writing, but until this memoir I didnt know what a large part of your childhood it was  apparently much of your intellectual and social life before you became a reader.
I assume youre familiar with Naomi Schaefer Rileys writing on foster care. She documents the unavoidable tradeoffs: if the authorities are too quick to remove children from their parents, they destroy families needlessly; if theyre too slow, children can end up neglected, abused or killed. And the whole system is understaffed and not always competent or vigilant. Its a sad fact of human nature that people who want to help and protect children and people who want to abuse and exploit them are both attracted to positions where theyll be in contact with children.
I assume youre familiar with Naomi Schaefer Rileys writing on foster care. She documents the unavoidable tradeoffs: if the authorities are too quick to remove children from their parents, they destroy families needlessly; if theyre too slow, children can end up neglected, abused or killed. And the whole system is understaffed and not always competent or vigilant. Its a sad fact of human nature that people who want to help and protect children and people who want to abuse and exploit them are both attracted to positions where theyll be in contact with children.
There seems no good solution to the problem of unfit parents, except maybe to address the social causes of addiction, but thats what the progressives say they want to do, with no idea how to do it.
There seems no good solution to the problem of unfit parents, except maybe to address the social causes of addiction, but thats what the progressives say they want to do, with no idea how to do it.
Like (4)
Reply
Share
Top
Latest
Discussions

Rob Henderson

Rob Henderson

Rob Henderson

Rob Henderson

Rob Henderson

Rob Henderson

Rob Henderson

Rob Henderson

Rob Henderson

Rob Henderson


undefined subscriptions will be displayed on your profile (edit)
Skip for now
For your security, we need to re-authenticate you.
Click the link we sent to sasha.p.podolsky@gmail.com, orclick here to sign in.