

1
Book meeting
Book a meeting
The very short version ofthisrecent NY Magazine article is that 48-year-old Andrew Huberman, host of the worlds #1 health podcast and Stanford professor, supposedly misled his girlfriend into believing he was faithful while, in reality, juggling relationships with 4 and possibly more other women.
The very short version of
recent NY Magazine article is that 48-year-old Andrew Huberman, host of the worlds #1 health podcast and Stanford professor, supposedly misled his girlfriend into believing he was faithful while, in reality, juggling relationships with 4 and possibly more other women.
Hard to believe an unmarried jacked tattooed podcaster from California with a million followers would be unfaithful to his girlfriend. Sometimes people surprise you.
The article is disjointed, containing forced innuendo without just outright saying, for example, that the author thinks Huberman is high on the Dark Triad traits, opting instead to awkwardly intersperse quotes from Hubermans conversations with evolutionary psychologist David Buss, as Buss explains the hallmarks of those traits.
Weirdly, there are a lot of out-of-context podcast quotes throughout the piece. It could have just concentrated on concrete facts about Huberman and his actual behavior (or supposed behavior as relayed by the people in his life). One gets the sense that the author, a 43-year-old woman, enjoyed investing many hours of her life listening to Huberman. She describes all of Hubermans five partners as assertive and successful and educated and sharp-witted. Would the author characterize herself with those adjectives? She goes on to write, there had been a type, and they were diverse expressions of that type. Would the author belong to one of the diverse expressions of that type?
Moving right along.
I have never listened to an episode of the Huberman Lab. Ive seen clips. It just seems kind of hokey. I get his appeal, though. Based on what Ive seen, I suspect many of his recommendations work because of the placebo effect. But the placebo effect is real. It works. In the same way that name-brand aspirin is more effective than the generic kind because peoplebelieveit will work better, the same exact health advice is probably more psychologically effective if it comes from a name-brand academic (Stanford prof) than from someone else.
I have never listened to an episode of the Huberman Lab. Ive seen clips. It just seems kind of hokey. I get his appeal, though. Based on what Ive seen, I suspect many of his recommendations work because of the placebo effect. But the placebo effect is real. It works. In the same way that name-brand aspirin is more effective than the generic kind because people
it will work better, the same exact health advice is probably more psychologically effective if it comes from a name-brand academic (Stanford prof) than from someone else.
The article claims that Huberman was cheating on his long-term girlfriend while telling her he wanted children and while he agreed that she should undergo IVF while simultaneously leading a bunch of other women on.Huberman obviously comes out of this looking the worst but the five women who failed to see through his deceit dont exactly come out looking great.
The article describes the women as "willing to have unprotected sex" because they didn't think the jacked tattooed podcaster with a million followers who, at least according to the article, was flighty and unresponsive was cheating. Again, the women are all described as educated and smart. All of that brainpower couldn't figure out an 8-piece jigsaw puzzle? Surely he couldn't be cheating! Come on. Be serious.
So much of this article echoes the West Elm Caleb saga from about 2 years ago. A bunch of women in NYC discovered a guy they met on the apps was simultaneously sleeping with all of them. Many of these women were outraged, leading to public venting on Tik Tok.
It also reminds me of thecoverageof the private online groups called Are We Dating the Same Guy. I mean. Of course youre all dating the same guy. Or the same subset of guys. Youre understandably drawn to certain attributes. Other women are drawn to those same attributes. So they flock to the guys with those attributes.
It also reminds me of the
of the private online groups called Are We Dating the Same Guy. I mean. Of course youre all dating the same guy. Or the same subset of guys. Youre understandably drawn to certain attributes. Other women are drawn to those same attributes. So they flock to the guys with those attributes.
The situation appears to reflect a continuing pattern of frustration among women in elite urban circles as they are confronted by an increasingly competitive landscape for a shrinking pool of suitable men. This dynamic empowers attractive men to conduct themselves in a manner that leaves many women profoundly dissatisfied.
Few people will just state it outright: Many attractive guys with lots of options like to date more than one woman at a time. Shocking, I know. Gender egalitarianism blinds people, especially educated people, to the magnitude of sex differences when it comes to sexual preferences.
In every culture in every region of the world, men express a stronger preference to have multiple sex partners over any specific time frame. Even in societies renowned for their egalitarian values. For example, when Norweigans are asked how many partners theyd like to have over the next 30 years, women say 5. Men say 25.
The establishment of social norms, customs, and legal frameworks has historically been a response to combat human tendencies that challenge communal harmony and wellbeing. Why do we have rules against theft? Because many people will gladly grab resources if theres little to no cost (as many U.S. cities are rediscovering). Even if the vast majority of people dont participate in a specific act, if a small but nontrivial percentage of them are willing to do so, then norms and customs and laws will arise to deter it.
The vast majority of people, even in a lawless society, would not commit murder. But  a small percentage might be tempted, so rules against murder arose. In Sweden,one percentof the population is responsible for 60 percent of the violent crime. This general pattern likely holds in just about every developed first-world country. Thats with laws. Without laws, maybe instead of 1 percent of the population inflicting lots of violence, it would be 2 percent. Cutting violent crime by half is good. So societies have laws.
The vast majority of people, even in a lawless society, would not commit murder. But  a small percentage might be tempted, so rules against murder arose. In Sweden,
of the population is responsible for 60 percent of the violent crime. This general pattern likely holds in just about every developed first-world country. Thats with laws. Without laws, maybe instead of 1 percent of the population inflicting lots of violence, it would be 2 percent. Cutting violent crime by half is good. So societies have laws.
Rules around commitment, monogamy, devotion, and so on arose to combat promiscuity. Societal expectations around commitment and monogamy arose to regulate sexual behavior.
Those rules have, to a large extent, fallen by the wayside. It is evident that we now live in a landscape where practices around relationships are increasingly fluid.
An increasing share of the challenge of relationship commitment is outsourced to the individual rather than to society.
In social psychology, there is a concept called situational strength.
The idea is that in strong situations in which there is external pressure to behave in a certain way, peoples individual differences are compressed.
In contrast, in weak situations in which there is little social pressure to behave in a certain way, people will be more likely to express their differences.
For instance, red lights are strong situations. Practically everyone, regardless of their preferences, personality traits, impulsivity, etc. will stop at a red light.
Conversely, yellow lights are weak situationstheres no clear protocol for how to react to them. People have more freedom in how to respond to them. Some people race through yellow lights and others slow down. With regard to relationship commitments, society used to be relatively strong in its situational strength. Today, we increasingly live in a yellow light society. If someone zooms through a red light and hurts someone, its fine to penalize them. If someone zooms through a yellow light and hurts someone? How to respond is less apparent.
Today, people with apparent sincerity expect highly desirable males to exert discipline, restraint, and strategic maneuvering to avoid temptation in an environment of immense abundance and few constraints. Today you can have multiple partners who are completely unfamiliar with one another.
Historically, one aspect that made courtship costly was its public nature. It was locally known who was courting whom. A man could not court several women at the same time. In the modern era, dating apps (Huberman met some of his partners on Raya) allow people to date several partners concurrently in non-overlapping social circles. These platforms cultivate a terrain ripe for sexual exploitation.
The modern era allows for duplicitous and deceptive people to move through different circles unnoticed. Interestingly, social media is bringing back gossip and reputation and other methods for tracking reputation. You can still be an anonymous rogue. But its becoming harder.
All of this is to say that there is fierce competition among educated women for a relatively small and dwindling pool of desirable men. Whoever belongs to the desirable and relatively scarce group will have more freedom to exert their preferences. In environments where women are scarce, men will compete and adjust themselves to match womens preferences. In such environments, long-term relationships tend to prevail. Because, on average, women more strongly prefer committed relationships. In environments where (desirable) men are scarce, women will compete and adjust themselves to match mens preferences. In such circumstances, short-term relationships or soft harems tend to prevail. Because, on average, men more strongly prefer casual relationships. As I explain this in detail in thisessay. This is probably why so many of these women were willing to have unprotected sex with a guy who, if the article portrays him accurately, did not seem particularly committed in his behavior, even if he was good at feeding these women a steady diet of emotionally resonant therapeutic verbiage and created the illusion of a future together. Also known as lovebombing.
All of this is to say that there is fierce competition among educated women for a relatively small and dwindling pool of desirable men. Whoever belongs to the desirable and relatively scarce group will have more freedom to exert their preferences. In environments where women are scarce, men will compete and adjust themselves to match womens preferences. In such environments, long-term relationships tend to prevail. Because, on average, women more strongly prefer committed relationships. In environments where (desirable) men are scarce, women will compete and adjust themselves to match mens preferences. In such circumstances, short-term relationships or soft harems tend to prevail. Because, on average, men more strongly prefer casual relationships. As I explain this in detail in this
. This is probably why so many of these women were willing to have unprotected sex with a guy who, if the article portrays him accurately, did not seem particularly committed in his behavior, even if he was good at feeding these women a steady diet of emotionally resonant therapeutic verbiage and created the illusion of a future together. Also known as lovebombing.
Men with lots of sexual partners also tend toexperiencea sharp decline in how sexually attractive they find their partner immediately after sex, whereas neither men with few partners nor women show this decline. In societies with permissive relationship norms, this tends to exacerbate the issue of desirable men leaving women feeling unsatisfied.
Men with lots of sexual partners also tend to
a sharp decline in how sexually attractive they find their partner immediately after sex, whereas neither men with few partners nor women show this decline. In societies with permissive relationship norms, this tends to exacerbate the issue of desirable men leaving women feeling unsatisfied.
Another weird thing about the NY Mag article is that the author never outright states what norm or value Huberman transgressed. It focuses on the emotional impact on Hubermans romantic partners rather than directly addressing the moral implications of infidelity.
It seems unwilling to say what, exactly, hes done wrong. The author writes about how on his podcast he promotes Athletic Greens which might not be as beneficial to health as the company claims. Okay (its a podcast ad). He isnt as involved in his lab as he lets on (not uncommon for university lab directors to be absent for long stretches of time). He deceives his romantic partners. Ah. Deception. Lies. Thats the bad thing. Not the cheating and the betrayal. The article implies deception, manipulation, duplicity, etc. but never flatly states, He cheated on his girlfriend, and that was wrong. It also focuses on her pain, and the heartache of the other women. But such an article would never say It doesnt matter if anyone is hurt, infidelity in and of itself is wrong.
These women who slept with Huberman are now apparently all in a group chat. A sort of support network. All united by this man they wanted to be deceived by. Not that they personally wanted this specific outcome. But its safe to assume they support sexual freedom. They support prioritizing ones own desires over whats best for the community. They support a nonjudgmental attitude toward relationship formation. They support prioritizing career over relationship obligations. They want a society where marriage is just one relationship arrangement among many. Add up the wants, and you create a society where highly desirable men can easily sleep with multiple women simultaneously and deceive them all.
From an article from more than a decade ago titledWhy women lose the dating game:
From an article from more than a decade ago titled
:
''It's wall-to-wall arseholes out there,'' reports Penny, a 31-year-old lawyer. She is stunned by how hard it is to meet suitable men willing to commit. ''I'm horrified by the number of gorgeous, independent and successful women my age who can't meet a decent man.''
Or as Louise Perry put itmore recently:
Or as Louise Perry put it
:
"The men who can attract hundreds or even thousands of women are the only people who have really benefited from the Tinder revolution. With so many options available to them, they're like brattish children set loose in a sweet shop."
Im enough of a psychologist that I suspect on some level these very smart women must have known that Huberman was being unfaithful. How many times can a guytellyou his phone died or that hell be back on grid tomorrow (lol) before you start to get a clue.
Im enough of a psychologist that I suspect on some level these very smart women must have known that Huberman was being unfaithful. How many times can a guy
you his phone died or that hell be back on grid tomorrow (lol) before you start to get a clue.
In his essays, the doctor Theodore Dalrymple would describe interacting with his female patients who described the mistreatment they suffered at the hands of men. These women would deny that mistreatment by these men was foreseeable. Then Dalrymple would ask the women if they thoughtheas a doctor would have recognized it in advance. Most of the women would say yes, of course. Hed ask them how he would have done so. And theyd laugh, enumerating precisely the factors that would have led to the conclusion (impulsive, dismissive, aggressive, flighty, unreliable, etc. in addition to physical attributes like tattoos, piercings, and so on). On some level, blindness can be willful.
In his essays, the doctor Theodore Dalrymple would describe interacting with his female patients who described the mistreatment they suffered at the hands of men. These women would deny that mistreatment by these men was foreseeable. Then Dalrymple would ask the women if they thought
as a doctor would have recognized it in advance. Most of the women would say yes, of course. Hed ask them how he would have done so. And theyd laugh, enumerating precisely the factors that would have led to the conclusion (impulsive, dismissive, aggressive, flighty, unreliable, etc. in addition to physical attributes like tattoos, piercings, and so on). On some level, blindness can be willful.
Some people have suggested that its a good thing that the media is making an example of him. But an example for what, exactly? Again, the article never explicitly notifies the reader of the principle he violated and why it was wrong to violate it. Hes being shamed in the article, but its not entirely clear why.
It focuses a lot on the deception part. A lot of people will read it and the takeaway wont be Its wrong to cheat. Rather, theyll come away thinking If Im caught cheating, Ill be shamed. So better not get caught.
Of course, another takeaway might be Lying is wrong, so dont lie. Which in turn opens the door to open relationships and polyamory and other novel arrangements, which might work for a vanishingly small percentage of the population but would lead to unanticipated heartache and suffering for just about everyone else.
Moreover, the article is focused on shaming a single person rather than using it to make a broader point about the importance of upholding your relationship commitments. If the point was to make an example, the article could have done something like Heres this guy who did something wrong. Heres what he did and why its wrong. Instead, it was more like, Heres a guy who did a bunch of stuff well imply was bad but wont outright say so. Heres some innuendo sprinkled in. People were hurt as a result, which is maybe why what he did was bad.
In a healthier society, where cultural eliteswho wield disproportionate influence on the stories and scripts that people live byupheld norms that would benefit most people, we would publicly promote values that minimize suffering and aim to forgive individuals who fail to live up to those values. Instead, we resist promoting such norms and then publicly shame individuals for violating them.
The articles emphasis on Hubermans dishonesty (hilariously citing his podcasts endorsement of Athletic Greens in an attempt to imply a pattern of deceit), while eschewing a direct critique of his conduct in relationships, reflects a deep reluctance to endorse anything resembling conventional values for relationship formation.
I thought it was widely accepted, especially by people who read glossy magazines and watch prestige TV, that shining in your professional life while being mediocre in your private life and personal relationships is aspirational, and far more preferable than the reverse. One of those gets you on a magazine cover and the other doesnt.
You can almost feel the author wanting to condemn his lack of commitment. But thats too pass. So the article focuses on lying.
In myrecent conversationwith Gad Saad, Gad told me that a few years ago, he was visiting Stanford to give a talk and emailed Huberman. Gad was displeased when Huberman ignored the email and simply never replied. I said "I don't think it's personal. He's just treating you the way he treats his girlfriends. Maybe you should be flattered."
In my
with Gad Saad, Gad told me that a few years ago, he was visiting Stanford to give a talk and emailed Huberman. Gad was displeased when Huberman ignored the email and simply never replied. I said "I don't think it's personal. He's just treating you the way he treats his girlfriends. Maybe you should be flattered."
**
Anyway, one can really only guess what the point of the article was.
I suspect one motivator is that the legacy media will eventually go after just about anyone who goes independent and becomes a competitor.
The proliferation of low-cost self-publishing platforms, such as podcasting, YouTube, Substack, and so on has given rise to intense competition for eyeballs. Legacy outlets really dont like this.
Im not fully confident in this but I cant help but think that if Huberman had his podcast on NPR or something I doubt this article would have been written.
If he had engaged in serious misconduct like abuse, then yes, even if he worked at CNN, someone would have written a splashy piece about it.
But for this gray area transgression, if hed been employed by a legacy media outlet, things would have played out differently.
Here Im drawing on theblack sheep effectin psychology. The general finding is that if guilt is absolutely certain, then people will punish an in-group member more severely than an out-group member. After all, in-group members should know better.
Here Im drawing on the
in psychology. The general finding is that if guilt is absolutely certain, then people will punish an in-group member more severely than an out-group member. After all, in-group members should know better.
However, when guilt isuncertain, people are more inclined to punish an out-group suspect rather than an in-group suspect. For gray area cases, people give members of their coalition the benefit of the doubt, and err on the side of punishment for those outside the circle.
However, when guilt is
, people are more inclined to punish an out-group suspect rather than an in-group suspect. For gray area cases, people give members of their coalition the benefit of the doubt, and err on the side of punishment for those outside the circle.
NY Mag attempted to ding Hubermans status a little. Regardless of the reason why, they hoped to send a signal to others that they should reduce their estimation of Huberman. And be cautious about disclosing their enjoyment of his podcast too enthusiastically. This probably wont happen, as the Venn diagram circles for NY Mag readers and Huberman listeners barely overlap. If anything, it will increase his audience and bolster his popular image as a figure of self-help/personal journey/inner healing.
Ultimately, this treatment of Huberman attempts to serve multiple purposes and fails at all of them.
Comments
Restacks
EL
EL
Mar 27, 2024
I read the article and I listen to Huberman. While the article is lame and gossipy, one clear point emerges: at least one of his partners thought they were in a committed relationship, and he deceived her. If you listen to Huberman, he describes a way of life that is PERFECT and requires utmost DISCIPLINE and RESTRAINT.  Dont just sleep, sleep perfectly. Dont drink. Get into really cold water all the time. Breathe perfectly. Control your emotions! Be insanely productive!  Discovering that Huberman doesnt seem to exhibit much restraint or discipline at all in his relationships (even if that is the fashionable thing to do these days) is, at least for me, eye-opening and disappointing.
I read the article and I listen to Huberman. While the article is lame and gossipy, one clear point emerges: at least one of his partners thought they were in a committed relationship, and he deceived her. If you listen to Huberman, he describes a way of life that is PERFECT and requires utmost DISCIPLINE and RESTRAINT.  Dont just sleep, sleep perfectly. Dont drink. Get into really cold water all the time. Breathe perfectly. Control your emotions! Be insanely productive!  Discovering that Huberman doesnt seem to exhibit much restraint or discipline at all in his relationships (even if that is the fashionable thing to do these days) is, at least for me, eye-opening and disappointing.
Like (44)
Reply
Share
Andrea Dustin
Andrea Dustin
Andrea Dustin
Andrea Dustin
Andrea Dustin
Mar 27, 2024
Another sign that the sexual revolution failed women the most. Thousands of words of pain from multiple women and the writer still cant summon the gumption to say unequivocally that men should only sleep with one woman at a time.
Another sign that the sexual revolution failed women the most. Thousands of words of pain from multiple women and the writer still cant summon the gumption to say unequivocally that men should only sleep with one woman at a time.
Like (24)
Reply
Share
Top
Latest
Discussions

Rob Henderson

Rob Henderson

Rob Henderson

Rob Henderson

Rob Henderson

Rob Henderson

Rob Henderson

Rob Henderson

Rob Henderson

Rob Henderson


undefined subscriptions will be displayed on your profile (edit)
Skip for now
For your security, we need to re-authenticate you.
Click the link we sent to sasha.p.podolsky@gmail.com, orclick here to sign in.