

1
Book meeting
Book a meeting
Liberals and conservatives disagree about who is vulnerable and who is capable of intentional wrongdoing.
This shapes their moral reactions to controversial events.
Recently, the White Houses official account on Twitter sparked controversy bypostingan AI-generated image in the distinctive style of Studio Ghibli, the renowned Japanese animation studio known for films likeSpirited Away. The illustration depicted a weeping fentanyl dealer from the Dominican Republic being arrested by U.S. immigration agents.
Recently, the White Houses official account on Twitter sparked controversy by
an AI-generated image in the distinctive style of Studio Ghibli, the renowned Japanese animation studio known for films like
. The illustration depicted a weeping fentanyl dealer from the Dominican Republic being arrested by U.S. immigration agents.
The woman portrayed in theimage, Virginia Basora-Gonzalez, had previously been deported after a conviction for fentanyl trafficking and was recently arrested by ICE in Philadelphia for allegedly reentering the U.S. illegally.
The woman portrayed in the
, Virginia Basora-Gonzalez, had previously been deported after a conviction for fentanyl trafficking and was recently arrested by ICE in Philadelphia for allegedly reentering the U.S. illegally.
The use of the Ghibli-inspired rendering, made possible by a new version of ChatGPT that transforms images into the artistic style of Hayao Miyazaki, quickly provoked widespread criticism and outrage across social and mainstream media.
One outletdescribedthe AI image as ghoulish, and I cant disagree. Its ugly. The person who posted it (probably a Gen Zer) may have done it out of cruelty, or a misguided attempt to troll, or because they genuinely thought it was clever and didnt consider the optics.
One outlet
the AI image as ghoulish, and I cant disagree. Its ugly. The person who posted it (probably a Gen Zer) may have done it out of cruelty, or a misguided attempt to troll, or because they genuinely thought it was clever and didnt consider the optics.
I thought it was obnoxious and contributes to the further erosion of trust in our institutions. Its undignified.
Still, I felt no sense of outrage about it the way many others have.
The way my mind works is if I see something that outrages people, I immediately consider counterfactuals and gauge my reaction. And then contemplate how variations of the event would elicit different responses from other people.
I thought,what if the races/genders were reversed. What if the AI-rendered image was a stern-looking Latina law enforcement officer arresting a tearful white guy?
I thought,
. What if the AI-rendered image was a stern-looking Latina law enforcement officer arresting a tearful white guy?
Many political disagreements arise because liberals and conservatives disagree about who is particularly vulnerable to victimization, and therefore who should be shielded from harm.
In his recent bookOutraged: Why We Fight About Morality and Politics And How To Find Common Ground, the psychologist Kurt Gray writes:
In his recent book
, the psychologist Kurt Gray writes:
Everyone agrees that both American citizens and undocumented immigrants can be victimized, but if you see illegal immigrants ason balance causing harm to American citizens by taking jobs or increasing crime, then you will be attracted to tighter immigration policies. On the other hand, if you focus on the vulnerability of undocumented immigrants, emphasizing the heightened suffering of people detained at the border or fleeing violence in their homeland, you will find looser immigration policies more appealing.
Everyone agrees that both American citizens and undocumented immigrants can be victimized, but if you see illegal immigrants ason balance causing harm to American citizens by taking jobs or increasing crime, then you will be attracted to tighter immigration policies. On the other hand, if you focus on the vulnerability of undocumented immigrants, emphasizing the heightened suffering of people detained at the border or fleeing violence in their homeland, you will find looser immigration policies more appealing.
Much of Grays research focuses on how people think about the minds of other entities.
In one study, he and his team asked more than 2,000 people to judge the minds of different beingsincluding a baby, a chimpanzee, a dead person, a dog, a fetus, a frog, a girl, God, and a robot.
The participants were asked to compare how well each of these beings could do things like feel fear, hunger, pain, and pleasure, or show emotions like rage. They also rated their ability to use self-control, remember things, make plans, communicate, and think.
But the researchers werent trying to figure out theactualmental abilities of a robot, for example. Instead, they wanted to know whatpeoplebelieve about those abilities. In one part of the study, people had to choose who was more likely to feel hungera dead person or a dog. Most people picked the dog.
But the researchers werent trying to figure out the
mental abilities of a robot, for example. Instead, they wanted to know what
believe about those abilities. In one part of the study, people had to choose who was more likely to feel hungera dead person or a dog. Most people picked the dog.
After looking at thousands of responses, the researchers found that people tend to think about minds in two main ways:
Vulnerable feelers:This means someone or something is seen as able to feel pain, pleasure, fear, and other emotions. If we see someone as a vulnerable feeler, were more likely to want to protect them. People believe vulnerable feelers are emotional and easy to hurt, but not very skilled or able to plan. A newborn baby is a clear example of a vulnerable feeler.
This means someone or something is seen as able to feel pain, pleasure, fear, and other emotions. If we see someone as a vulnerable feeler, were more likely to want to protect them. People believe vulnerable feelers are emotional and easy to hurt, but not very skilled or able to plan. A newborn baby is a clear example of a vulnerable feeler.
Thinking doers:This means someone or something is good at planning, communicating, staying in control, and remembering things. Thinking doers are seen as capable and able to act in the world, but not very emotional. A successful CEO is a good example of a thinking doer.
This means someone or something is good at planning, communicating, staying in control, and remembering things. Thinking doers are seen as capable and able to act in the world, but not very emotional. A successful CEO is a good example of a thinking doer.
To see someone as truly responsible for doing something badlike a villainwe first have to see them as a thinking doer. In other words, they have to be able to understand their actions and make choices on purpose.
Thats why adults who commit serious crimes usually face stronger punishments than children. Adults are seen as thinking doers, while children are viewed more as vulnerable feelers who dont fully understand what theyre doing.
Youre more likely to condemn a mafia hitman for cold-blooded murder than a person with paranoid schizophrenia who kills his neighbor out of a mistaken belief that he is being surveilled.
We see babies and animals as vulnerable feelers but not thinking doers. In contrast, research participants view God as a thinking doer but not a vulnerable feeler. God is seen as a powerful doer, and people dont wonder if he might be hungry, depressed, or embarrassed.
Interestingly, one studyfoundthat people perceive military veterans more as thinking doers and less so as vulnerable feelers. This pattern alsoshowswhen people are asked about Asian peopleagentic but unfeeling. As a member of both groups, do people perceive me as extra emotionless?
Interestingly, one study
that people perceive military veterans more as thinking doers and less so as vulnerable feelers. This pattern also
when people are asked about Asian peopleagentic but unfeeling. As a member of both groups, do people perceive me as extra emotionless?
Anyway, in one study, people responded to the question, If you were forced to harm one of these characters, which one would it be more painful for you to harm?
As you might predict, people expected to feel bad when harming something that can feel and suffer. For example, they reported it would be more painful for them to harm a baby than a robot. It feels more distressing and immoral to harm beings that we categorize as vulnerable feelers as opposed to thinking doers.
When an ordinary person gets punched, we feel alarmed. But when its Batman or some other strong thinking doer, we barely reactbecause we expect them to handle it.
In one fascinating study, people were asked to imagine they had 4 pills that caused pain. One pill caused mild discomfort, the other 3 caused intense (but temporary) pain.
They had to divide the pills between Ted Bundy, an ordinary bank teller, Mother Teresa, and an orphan child.
Unsurprisingly, people gave the child the pill that caused mild discomfort. They gave a pain pill to Ted Bundy.
But the key test was between the bank teller and Mother Teresa. Would people givelesspain to the nun because of her good deeds, ormorepain because she seemed stronger?
But the key test was between the bank teller and Mother Teresa. Would people give
pain to the nun because of her good deeds, or
pain because she seemed stronger?
The answer: when forced to choose, people gave more pain to Mother Teresa than to an ordinary bank teller. They viewed Mother Teresa as more of a thinking doer than a vulnerable feeler, and thus believed she would handle the pain better than an ordinary person.
So far the studies Ive described apply to just about everyone regardless of their political leanings.
But different assumptions of vulnerability help to explain the moral divide between liberals and conservatives.
Gray and his team found that liberals and conservatives disagree about whether certain groups areespecially vulnerableto harm.
Gray and his team found that liberals and conservatives disagree about whether certain groups are
to harm.
In other words, regardless of political orientation, people have similar intuitions that babies are vulnerable feelers who have limited capacity to competently move through the world and CEOs are thinking doers who have limited capacity to experience pain or suffering.
In contrast, according to Grays research, liberals tend to have amplified assumptions of vulnerability for historically marginalized othered groups. As he writes:
The liberal tendency to amplify differences in vulnerabilityexplains why they often divide the historical and modern world into oppressors (very invulnerable powerful people) and oppressed (very vulnerable othered people). The left-leaning amplification of assumption of vulnerability differences can be seen when Karl Marx describes society as a struggle between the exploited proletariat and the exploiting ruling class.
The liberal tendency to amplify differences in vulnerabilityexplains why they often divide the historical and modern world into oppressors (very invulnerable powerful people) and oppressed (very vulnerable othered people). The left-leaning amplification of assumption of vulnerability differences can be seen when Karl Marx describes society as a struggle between the exploited proletariat and the exploiting ruling class.
As an example, compared with conservatives, liberals view police officers (who they view as powerful) as less vulnerable.
Conservatives, though, have a tendency to flatten differences in vulnerability, meaning they believe people are equally likely to be vulnerable feelers or thinking doers. For instance, conservatives believe cops and criminals alike can plan, execute, strategize, as well as feel pain, sorrow, despair, and so on.
In contrast, liberals tend to categorize police officers as coldly efficient thinking doers and criminals as vulnerable feelers.
Along the same lines, one studyrevealeddifferences in moral reasoning between liberals and conservatives. They used the now-familiar trolley problem design.
Along the same lines, one study
differences in moral reasoning between liberals and conservatives. They used the now-familiar trolley problem design.
Researchers recruited participants, collected their political affiliations, and divided them into two groups.
In one group, participants were given the choice to push a man named Chip Ellsworth III (who participants generally believed was white) onto a set of train tracks to save 100 members of the Harlem Jazz Orchestra (who participants believed were black).
In the other group, participants were given the option to push a man named Tyrone Payton (who participants believed was black) onto a set of tracks to save 100 members of the New York Philharmonic (who participants believed were white).
Liberals tended to favor sacrificing Chip to save 100 mostly African American lives, whereas conservatives showed no bias in either scenario.
Put differently, conservatives were evenhanded, but liberals were not; they were more likely to kill a white person to save a hundred black people than vice versa.
Conservatives treated all lives equally, whereas liberals were more willing to sacrifice the life of a white person over a black person.
A more recentstudyfound that compared with white conservatives, white liberals tend to downplay their own verbal competence when communicating with members of ethnic minority groups. The researchers found that Democratic politicians used simplified language when delivering speeches to largely ethnic minority audiences versus mostly white audiences, whereas Republicans spoke similarly regardless of audience. Moreover, liberal individuals used more simplified language when speaking with black people versus white people. In contrast, there was no difference in the way conservative individuals spoke based on the race of their conversation partner. Discussing this tendency of white liberals, the researchersnotethat Even if its ultimately well-intentioned, it could be seen as patronizing.
A more recent
found that compared with white conservatives, white liberals tend to downplay their own verbal competence when communicating with members of ethnic minority groups. The researchers found that Democratic politicians used simplified language when delivering speeches to largely ethnic minority audiences versus mostly white audiences, whereas Republicans spoke similarly regardless of audience. Moreover, liberal individuals used more simplified language when speaking with black people versus white people. In contrast, there was no difference in the way conservative individuals spoke based on the race of their conversation partner. Discussing this tendency of white liberals, the researchers
that Even if its ultimately well-intentioned, it could be seen as patronizing.
This is consistent with the idea that left-leaning individuals tend to view ethnic minorities as vulnerable feelers more so than thinking doers, while conservatives are more likely to see everyone as having the capacity for both.
As Gray writes, Amplifying versus dampening differences in vulnerabilityexplains why liberals accuse conservatives of denying obvious social inequalities and why conservatives accuse liberals of exaggerating differences and creating division.
And In the minds of committed conservatives, everyone suffers similarly, and the liberal exaggeration of the victimhood of the othered actually makes them more likely to be victimized.
These assumptions of vulnerability help explain moral disagreement. Liberals and conservatives disagree about who is especially vulnerable to mistreatment.
Our social world is complex, so we develop heuristics, or mental shortcuts, to help make sense of it.
Moral typecasting is a heuristic.
Building on his earlier findings, Gray has found that people have a tendency to typecast others into either villains or victims.
Moral typecasting is the intuitive urge to see people aseither100 percent villains and zero percent victims or zero percent villains and 100 percent victims. This allows us to feel righteous when we excuse the misdeeds of those who suffer or ignore the suffering of those who have harmed others.
Moral typecasting is the intuitive urge to see people as
100 percent villains and zero percent victims or zero percent villains and 100 percent victims. This allows us to feel righteous when we excuse the misdeeds of those who suffer or ignore the suffering of those who have harmed others.
This heuristic simplifies people into two exaggerated sides: blameless victims versus invulnerable villains.
Interestingly, there is an inverse correlation between perceptions of villainy and victimhood. The more someone is seen as a villain, the less people view them as capable of being a victim. And the more someone is seen as a victim, the less people view them as capable of behaving in a villainous manner.
Because of this tendency to typecast and simplify the social world, we take statistical trendsfor instance, men are more often the perpetrators of violence and women are more often the victimsand generalize it to all men and women. We typecast men as violent thinking doers and women as passive vulnerable feelers.
A 2021 studyfoundevidence for the Virtuous Victim effect, in which victims are seen as more moral than non-victims who have behaved in exactly the same way. In our minds, vulnerability seems inconsistent with blame.
A 2021 study
evidence for the Virtuous Victim effect, in which victims are seen as more moral than non-victims who have behaved in exactly the same way. In our minds, vulnerability seems inconsistent with blame.
Politically, committed partisans left and the right view themselves as blameless and the other side as villainous. Moral typecasting explains why a canceled pundit on the other side (more villain than victim) seems like a villain finally getting their comeuppance, while someone cancelled on your side seems like an innocent victim of a rabid online mob.
Grays research suggests that people perceive victims are less blameworthy for their actions, and view victims as especially capable of feeling pain.
In contrast, villains are seen as more blameworthy for their actions, and less capable of suffering pain.
In one study, people were asked to rate how much pain different individuals would feel if they stepped on glass. Villains (e.g., a serial killer) were rated as feeling less pain than non-villains (e.g., a schoolteacher). The eviler someone seemed, the more their capacity for suffering was denied.
Identifying as a victim is a good way to escape blame. Because being a victim helps people escape blame, people often exaggerate their suffering, either subconsciously or deliberately.
In the bookWin Your Case, the successful trial lawyer Garry Spence outlines seven steps for winning a criminal defense including becoming the victim, which involves emphasizing the defendants suffering and recasting the accuser as callous, cruel, and vindictive. This advice is based on his own experience of judges and juries giving lighter sentences to defendants who successfully prove their victimhood.
In the book
, the successful trial lawyer Garry Spence outlines seven steps for winning a criminal defense including becoming the victim, which involves emphasizing the defendants suffering and recasting the accuser as callous, cruel, and vindictive. This advice is based on his own experience of judges and juries giving lighter sentences to defendants who successfully prove their victimhood.
John Wayne Gacy, who kidnapped, raped, and murdered at least 33 people understood this when he latersaid, I see myself more as a victim than a perpetrator. I was the victim, I was cheated out of my childhood. Continuing, he wondered aloud if, there would be someone, somewhere who understood how badly it had hurt to be John Wayne Gacy.
John Wayne Gacy, who kidnapped, raped, and murdered at least 33 people understood this when he later
, I see myself more as a victim than a perpetrator. I was the victim, I was cheated out of my childhood. Continuing, he wondered aloud if, there would be someone, somewhere who understood how badly it had hurt to be John Wayne Gacy.
There is general agreement across political lines that certain entities (e.g., babies and animals) are more vulnerable than others (e.g., CEOs and robots).
But there is a political difference when it comes to historically marginalized groups (women, ethnic minorities, LGBT, etc.). Liberals view these groups as exquisitely sensitive to pain and suffering. And liberals view historically dominant groups as uniquelyinsensitiveto pain and suffering (men, white people, heterosexual people, etc.)
But there is a political difference when it comes to historically marginalized groups (women, ethnic minorities, LGBT, etc.). Liberals view these groups as exquisitely sensitive to pain and suffering. And liberals view historically dominant groups as uniquely
to pain and suffering (men, white people, heterosexual people, etc.)
Conservatives, in contrast, view people regardless of race, gender, sexual orientation, etc. as equally susceptible to victimization.
Applying the moral typecasting template, you can see how progressives viewed the image of the immigration agent arresting the weeping woman.
Progressives see a white male perpetrator (who they perceive as relatively impervious to pain) acting in his capacity as a law enforcement officer (also perceived as impervious to pain).
Then they see a woman (who they perceive asespeciallyvulnerable to pain), who is also a member of an ethnic minority (also perceived as more vulnerable to pain), who isalsoan illegal immigrant (another vulnerable category).
Then they see a woman (who they perceive as
vulnerable to pain), who is also a member of an ethnic minority (also perceived as more vulnerable to pain), who is
an illegal immigrant (another vulnerable category).
Conservatives see a law enforcement officer arresting a criminal, with both individuals capable of blame, action, responsibility, and so on.
Because conservatives view people as relatively equally likely to feel pain and suffering, the image was not especially outrageous to them.
Of course, Im speaking about normal conservatives here.
Once you start looking at the fringes, things start to get weird because extreme ideology warps peoples minds.
Far-right racists enjoy the image because of its optics. If the image had shown a nonwhite female law enforcement officer arresting a white male, normal conservatives would still be fine with it while far-right lunatics would post racist comments.
Likewise, if the image had shown a nonwhite female officer arresting a white male, the far-left would still be against it because they are more committed to dismantling society and abolishing law enforcement than they are to being anti-white.
Comments
Restacks
Jason Jonker
Jason Jonker
Jasons Substack
Jasons Substack
Jasons Substack
6d
I can see this dynamic at work in the world of addiction recovery. Conservatives view addicts as thinker-doers and tend to emphasize the conscious choices of the addicts. They often lay the blame for the addiction and crimes committed by the addict at the feet of the addict.
I can see this dynamic at work in the world of addiction recovery. Conservatives view addicts as thinker-doers and tend to emphasize the conscious choices of the addicts. They often lay the blame for the addiction and crimes committed by the addict at the feet of the addict.
Liberals see the addicts as vulnerable victims. They blame society or dehumanization or trauma for the addiction. They also feel squeamish about enforcement of drug laws because they view the enforcement as causing more pain to already vulnerable people.
Liberals see the addicts as vulnerable victims. They blame society or dehumanization or trauma for the addiction. They also feel squeamish about enforcement of drug laws because they view the enforcement as causing more pain to already vulnerable people.
This explains so much.
This explains so much.
Like (13)
Reply
Share
Eric Facer
Eric Facer
Erics Substack
Erics Substack
Erics Substack
6d
Gray, in my opinion, presents a false dichotomy when he asserts:
Gray, in my opinion, presents a false dichotomy when he asserts:
Everyone agrees that both American citizens and undocumented immigrants can be victimized, but if you see illegal immigrants ason balance causing harm to American citizens by taking jobs or increasing crime, then you will be attracted to tighter immigration policies. On the other hand, if you focus on the vulnerability of undocumented immigrants, emphasizing the heightened suffering of people detained at the border or fleeing violence in their homeland, you will find looser immigration policies more appealing.
Everyone agrees that both American citizens and undocumented immigrants can be victimized, but if you see illegal immigrants ason balance causing harm to American citizens by taking jobs or increasing crime, then you will be attracted to tighter immigration policies. On the other hand, if you focus on the vulnerability of undocumented immigrants, emphasizing the heightened suffering of people detained at the border or fleeing violence in their homeland, you will find looser immigration policies more appealing.
I do not see illegal immigrants from either of these perspectives. Rather, I see them as individuals who have broken our lawsunless they qualify for asylum or some other exception to our immigration statutesand should be treated accordingly, i.e., deported. No exceptions. I don't care if the guy has won a Nobel Prize; if he is an illegal immigrant, he's got to go. If you want to live here, you've got to follow rules.
I do not see illegal immigrants from either of these perspectives. Rather, I see them as individuals who have broken our lawsunless they qualify for asylum or some other exception to our immigration statutesand should be treated accordingly, i.e., deported. No exceptions. I don't care if the guy has won a Nobel Prize; if he is an illegal immigrant, he's got to go. If you want to live here, you've got to follow rules.
Now, I do have strong opinions regarding who we should allow to emigrate to our country. For example, we should only admit those whose values are compatible with our democratic system of government and pluralistic society. Europe has paid a terrible price for not adopting this prerequisite. (See "Strange Death of Europe," by Douglas Murray.)
Now, I do have strong opinions regarding who we should allow to emigrate to our country. For example, we should only admit those whose values are compatible with our democratic system of government and pluralistic society. Europe has paid a terrible price for not adopting this prerequisite. (See "Strange Death of Europe," by Douglas Murray.)
In addition, we should increase the number of H-1B visas issued to those foreigners with technical skills in demand and provide them with pathways to citizenship. Also, we should make it easier for many foreigners who attend our universities and wish to remain in our countryunless they parade around campus shouting, "Death to America!!"
In addition, we should increase the number of H-1B visas issued to those foreigners with technical skills in demand and provide them with pathways to citizenship. Also, we should make it easier for many foreigners who attend our universities and wish to remain in our countryunless they parade around campus shouting, "Death to America!!"
Others may have different views regarding who should be allowed to live in our country. And that's fine. Compromise, after all, is what democracy is all about. But everyone, in my opinion, should start from the following two premises: (1) no one is welcome here who enters our country illegally, and (2) there are practical limits on the number of immigrants we can accommodate.
Others may have different views regarding who should be allowed to live in our country. And that's fine. Compromise, after all, is what democracy is all about. But everyone, in my opinion, should start from the following two premises: (1) no one is welcome here who enters our country illegally, and (2) there are practical limits on the number of immigrants we can accommodate.
Like (3)
Reply
Share
Top
Latest
Discussions

Rob Henderson

Rob Henderson

Rob Henderson

Rob Henderson

Rob Henderson

Rob Henderson

Rob Henderson

Rob Henderson

Rob Henderson

Rob Henderson


undefined subscriptions will be displayed on your profile (edit)
Skip for now
For your security, we need to re-authenticate you.
Click the link we sent to sasha.p.podolsky@gmail.com, orclick here to sign in.