

1
Book meeting
Book a meeting
Subscribed
Share
Share
Give a gift subscription
Give a gift subscription
When I see how much elite hatred is aimed at Elon Musk, I think about ShakespearesJulius Caesar(which is based from PlutarchsLives).
When I see how much elite hatred is aimed at Elon Musk, I think about Shakespeares
(which is based from Plutarchs
).
In the opening scene of the play, the commoners of Rome are seen celebrating Caesars recent triumph over Pompey.
Two tribunes (elected officials), Flavius and Marullus, accost two of the commoners, asking them to name their trades and explain why they are out in their best attire rather than working.
The commoners respond to the tribunes condescension with indirect answers and puns that annoy the tribunes even more.
Eventually, Flavius and Marullus learn that the plebeians are cheering for Caesar. The tribunes scorn them for doing this.
They tell the commoners that Pompey was a Roman too. So Caesars success was not truly a triumph for Rome.
Flavius later tells Marullus that they should remove the decorations from Caesars statues during Caesars parade.
Marullus questions this plan, stating that it also happens to be the Feast of Lupercal, a celebration of fertility.
But Flavius is adamant that they remove the ornaments, because the removal will help to prevent Caesar from seeing himself as too great.
This first scene ofJulius Caesarshows that the tribunes want to prevent the rise of a potential tyrant. But they themselves are more than willing to push the commoners around.
This first scene of
shows that the tribunes want to prevent the rise of a potential tyrant. But they themselves are more than willing to push the commoners around.
Later, two other prominent RomansBrutus and Cassiusare likewise shown expressing concern about Caesars growing popularity.
Cassius asks Brutus how Caesar has any more right to greatness than Brutus or himself.
Cassius tells Brutus a story: When they were children, Cassius saved young Julius Caesar from drowning. Cassius always viewed himself as superior for rescuing Caesar. He is now aggravated that Caesar has risen above him.
Cassius decides to orchestrate Caesars assassination. Cassius gradually convinces other members of the Roman elite to help him carry out the conspiracy.
Meanwhile, Caesar himself, speaking privately with Mark Antony, expresses suspicions about Cassius:
Caesar is saying all men are hungry, either for food, entertainment (he loves no playshe hears no music), or power. If prosperous men arent tempted by food and entertainment, then they crave power. Thus, prosperous men who are lean are dangerous.
Mark Antony dismisses Caesars concerns about Cassius, because Cassius is a noble Roman. But as events unfold, we see that Antony was misguided.
Caesar was correct in his judgment of Cassius.
The eminent literary critic (and my former professor) Harold Bloom has stated that Caesars estimate of Cassius shows him to be the best analyst of another human being in all of Shakespeare.
Bloom goes on to characterize Cassius as embodying a spirit of resentment, unhappy as he is at contemplating greatness beyond him.
Cassius secretly arranges to have fake notes sent to Brutus, who is fooled into thinking the notes have been written by ordinary Roman citizens who want the Roman elites to stand up against Caesar.
When persuading the other conspirators to help him carry out the assassination plot, Cassius emphasizes his lofty concerns, stating that eliminating Caesar will help to preserve the Roman Republic (which didnt happenthe assassination contributed to igniting a civil war in Rome).
But Cassiuss story to Brutus indicates that the assassination was in part fueled by hisresentmentthat Caesar grew into someone more powerful than himself, thus upending their former status disparity.
But Cassiuss story to Brutus indicates that the assassination was in part fueled by his
that Caesar grew into someone more powerful than himself, thus upending their former status disparity.
Using the language of concern to disguise darker motives like competitiveness and aggressionhas been foundto be an effective strategy for undermining rivals.
Using the language of concern to disguise darker motives like competitiveness and aggression
to be an effective strategy for undermining rivals.
In a recentpapertitled Beyond Populism: The Psychology of Status-Seeking and Extreme Political Discontent, a team of researchers investigated whether the desire to obtain status underlies extreme political discontent.
In a recent
titled Beyond Populism: The Psychology of Status-Seeking and Extreme Political Discontent, a team of researchers investigated whether the desire to obtain status underlies extreme political discontent.
There are two different kinds of status: Dominance and prestige.
Dominance: Associated with narcissism, aggression, and disagreeableness. Joseph Stalin obtained status through dominance.
People confer status to dominant individuals because of what dominant individuals can dotothem (inflict costspain, humiliation, injuries, disfigurement, violence, etc.).
People confer status to dominant individuals because of what dominant individuals can do
them (inflict costspain, humiliation, injuries, disfigurement, violence, etc.).
Prestige: Associated with stable self-esteem, social acceptance, and conscientiousness. Stephen Hawking obtained status through prestige.
People confer status to prestigious individuals because of what prestigious individuals can doforthem (provide benefitsteach them things, grant them access to resources, increase their status by being associated with them, and so on).
People confer status to prestigious individuals because of what prestigious individuals can do
them (provide benefitsteach them things, grant them access to resources, increase their status by being associated with them, and so on).
The researchers recruited several hundred U.S. participants.
The study had three main goals:
1. Test if status-seeking drives political discontent
2. Comparepopulismandstatus-seekingto see if one is a stronger predictor of political discontent than the other
2. Compare
and
to see if one is a stronger predictor of political discontent than the other
3. Investigate which form of status-seeking (dominance vs. prestige) is more likely to predict political discontent
To measure thedesire for status, researchers administered the Status-Driven Risk Taking scale to participants.
To measure the
, researchers administered the Status-Driven Risk Taking scale to participants.
This scale measures the pursuit for money, power, andsocial prestige.
This scale measures the pursuit for money, power, and
.
Participants rated how strongly they agreed with statements like I would enjoy being a famous and powerful person, even if it meant a high risk of assassination and I would take a very high-status job even if I had to live in a place where there are many deadly diseases.
Basically, do you value status so much that you are willing to put your life in serious danger in order to obtain it?
To measurepopulism, participants completed a populist attitude scale.
To measure
, participants completed a populist attitude scale.
They rated how much they agreed with statements like The government is pretty much run by a few big interests looking out for themselves and Quite a few of the people running the government are crooked.
To measuredominance, participants rated how accurately statements like I enjoy having control over others and Others know it is better to let me have my way described them.
To measure
, participants rated how accurately statements like I enjoy having control over others and Others know it is better to let me have my way described them.
Forprestige, they rated how accurately statements such as People I know respect and admire me and Others seek my advice on a variety of matters described them.
For
, they rated how accurately statements such as People I know respect and admire me and Others seek my advice on a variety of matters described them.
Forpolitical discontent, participants rated how much they agreed with statements such as I would continue to support an organization that seeks to improve my groups political and legal rights even if the organization sometimes turns to violence, I would attack police or security forces if I saw them beating members of my group, and I share my moral/political beliefs to make people who disagree with me feel bad.
For
, participants rated how much they agreed with statements such as I would continue to support an organization that seeks to improve my groups political and legal rights even if the organization sometimes turns to violence, I would attack police or security forces if I saw them beating members of my group, and I share my moral/political beliefs to make people who disagree with me feel bad.
The researchers also measuredStrong Leader Preferences. Participants rated how much they agreed with statements like Our country needs a strong leader right now and We need strong leadership in order to overcome societies difficulties.
The researchers also measured
. Participants rated how much they agreed with statements like Our country needs a strong leader right now and We need strong leadership in order to overcome societies difficulties.
The researchers controlled for gender, age, educational level, income, and ethnicity.
Did people who scored highly on status-seeking also express higher levels of political dissatisfaction? Yes.
Participants who agreed that they would be willing to shorten their lifespan by ten years in order to become extremely wealthy (one of the items on the status scale) were more likely to say that they would support or participate in political violence.
People who scored highly on status-seeking were more likely to:
Support political violence
Share hostile political rumors on social media
Attempt to demonstrate moral and political superiority in online discussions
Fight over political and moral questions online
Interestingly, people who scored highly on status-seeking reported alowerdesire for a strong political leader. Why might this be?
Interestingly, people who scored highly on status-seeking reported a
desire for a strong political leader. Why might this be?
The researchers provide a suggestion:
Those who crave status hesitate to endorse strong leadership, because strong leaders may hamper their chances of climbing the social ladder.
Those who crave status hesitate to endorse strong leadership, because strong leaders may hamper their chances of climbing the social ladder.
This implies that people who crave status dont want strong leaders standing in their way.
Intriguingly, participants who scored highly on populism didnt express much political discontent.
Populists were more likely to engage in political arguments online.
But unlike status-seeking, populism was not at all correlated with support for political violence.
The researchers suggest that populism is associated with such narrow, moderate forms of political discontent.
And also unlike status-seeking, populism was positively associated with a desire for strong leadership.
Populists favor strong leaders. Status seekers dont.
The researchers separately analyzed whetherdominanceand prestige were unique predictors of political discontent.
The researchers separately analyzed whether
and prestige were unique predictors of political discontent.
Results indicated that people who scored highly on dominance also reported higher levels of:
Support for political violence
Intentions to share hostile political rumors on social media
Inclinations to demonstrate moral and political superiority in online discussions
Willingness to fight over political and moral questions online
And similar to status-seekers, people with high dominance were more disapproving of strong leaders.
As the researchers put it, a likely interpretation is that dominant individuals do not view the appointment of strong leaders as a viable strategy for them to attain status.
What about prestige? The results were essentially the reverse of the dominance findings.
People who scored highly on prestige reported:
Lowersupport for political violence
support for political violence
Reducedintentions to share hostile political rumors on social media
intentions to share hostile political rumors on social media
Disinclinationto demonstrate moral and political superiority in online discussions
to demonstrate moral and political superiority in online discussions
Lesswillingness to fight over political and moral questions online
willingness to fight over political and moral questions online
People high in prestige also generally supported strong leadership, unlike people with high dominance orientations
The researchers state:
Dominance, not prestige, is the more relevant mechanism in understanding how status-seeking can translate into various forms of extreme political discontent.
Dominance, not prestige, is the more relevant mechanism in understanding how status-seeking can translate into various forms of extreme political discontent.
Dominance-orientation, rather than prestige, gives rise to what the researchers characterize as the syndrome of extreme political discontent.
But dominance-oriented status seekers are not interested in appointing a strong leader to fix things. A strong leader would get in their way in the way of what they truly desire.
The researchers state:
Populism fuels a cluster of more passive forms of discontent. Populists privately believe that the political system is corrupt and they promote strong leaders who can take care of that problem for them.
Populism fuels a cluster of more passive forms of discontent. Populists privately believe that the political system is corrupt and they promote strong leaders who can take care of that problem for them.
And that:
Dominance-motivated individuals, in contrast, are motivated to take on the source of their discontent themselves and this fuels the most active forms of dissent: Behavioural intentions to fight the police; a willingness to not only believe that the system is corrupt but to share information about it with wide audiences on social media; and a habit of actively using moralization to suppress the views of others.
Dominance-motivated individuals, in contrast, are motivated to take on the source of their discontent themselves and this fuels the most active forms of dissent: Behavioural intentions to fight the police; a willingness to not only believe that the system is corrupt but to share information about it with wide audiences on social media; and a habit of actively using moralization to suppress the views of others.
In short, the paper indicates that dominance-oriented status seeking is the key underlying driver of political discontent.
Psychologically, what seems to emerge here are two distinct approaches to navigating social hierarchies.
The first is dominance-oriented status seeking. Dominance is the drive to rise to the top of the hierarchy through force and intimidation.
The second approach is the one populists favor: They are discontent with the current system. But, the researchers suggest, their alternative political vision is not one in which they personally are placed at the top of the hierarchy. Rather, they seek to promote others to a top position that they believe will selectively benefit them.
Populists dont want to climb the social hierarchy themselves. They would prefer to appoint someone to a position of power who would then confer benefits to them.
In contrast, dominance-oriented status seekers are eager to climb up the hierarchy. They dont want a strong leader. This is why, according to the researchers, they engage in more active forms of discontent and are fueled by a personal craving for power.
In Shakespeares tragedy, the titular character was worried about lean men. Who is leanersupporters of populism or dominance-oriented status seekers?
Populists want to appoint a Caesar-like figure to be in charge.
Dominance-orientedstatusseekers want to take power for themselves. And are willing to inflict violence to obtain it.
Dominance-oriented
seekers want to take power for themselves. And are willing to inflict violence to obtain it.
The populists want a strong leader to liberate them from the dominance-oriented status seekers and rule according to the populists preferences.
The dominance-oriented status seekers want to be liberated from the population and strong leaders, preferring to rule according to their own preferences.
To receive new posts, access more than100 premium posts, and support my work, consider becoming a free or paid subscriber.
Subscribed

Comments
Restacks
Cassandra anonymous
Cassandra anonymous
Cassandra anonymous
Cassandra anonymous
Cassandra anonymous
Sep 8
Great deep dive into one of the themes of your excellent talk on Friday.  I wish you would have further connected the tension between dominance and prestige based status to the luxury belief concept, and in general to luxury belief activism which often suggests that striving for dominance (via cancellation and female aggression) serves to compensate for lack of sources of prestige (academic ability or other positive attributes, social standing).
Great deep dive into one of the themes of your excellent talk on Friday.  I wish you would have further connected the tension between dominance and prestige based status to the luxury belief concept, and in general to luxury belief activism which often suggests that striving for dominance (via cancellation and female aggression) serves to compensate for lack of sources of prestige (academic ability or other positive attributes, social standing).
Like (4)
Reply
Share
Frank Lee
Frank Lee
The Social Misfit Newsletter
The Social Misfit Newsletter
The Social Misfit Newsletter
Sep 8
Edited
This is terrific Rob.  Thank you.  I was not aware of this study.  Ironically today I am in a conversation with a liberal friend that is defending activists jurists in the Supreme Court.   Before reading this piece from you with this study, I had commented that I find the activism-as-a-way-of-life mindset of my liberal friends and young democrats a fascinating study in human psychology and also interesting with respect to history and mass cultural shifts, but that today seem to be more often young, educated upper-class white females.
This is terrific Rob.  Thank you.  I was not aware of this study.  Ironically today I am in a conversation with a liberal friend that is defending activists jurists in the Supreme Court.   Before reading this piece from you with this study, I had commented that I find the activism-as-a-way-of-life mindset of my liberal friends and young democrats a fascinating study in human psychology and also interesting with respect to history and mass cultural shifts, but that today seem to be more often young, educated upper-class white females.
My thinking on this is that the historically reasonably open and reasonably fair US system of rewarding people based on productive merit... the meritocracy if you will... just like as demonstrated in the continued record-breaking athletic performances in the Olympics... which the US has dominated for almost a century...  that the US that fueled and spread throughout the world with the post WWII Global Order... and thus as made that competition for merit reward a global game... it has just raised the bar for what it takes to win.    And then at the same time we have pushed so many through the high-learning factory to gain prestigious degrees... a problem has arisen that is made of two parts:
My thinking on this is that the historically reasonably open and reasonably fair US system of rewarding people based on productive merit... the meritocracy if you will... just like as demonstrated in the continued record-breaking athletic performances in the Olympics... which the US has dominated for almost a century...  that the US that fueled and spread throughout the world with the post WWII Global Order... and thus as made that competition for merit reward a global game... it has just raised the bar for what it takes to win.    And then at the same time we have pushed so many through the high-learning factory to gain prestigious degrees... a problem has arisen that is made of two parts:
- One: the expectation for high status has risen from all the education and also exacerbated by social media where celebrity-ism can be made in a day... and virtual likes and followers provides tribal acceptance endorphins.
- One: the expectation for high status has risen from all the education and also exacerbated by social media where celebrity-ism can be made in a day... and virtual likes and followers provides tribal acceptance endorphins.
- Two: gaining rewards in the open meritocracy has become very much more difficult for the following reasons:
- Two: gaining rewards in the open meritocracy has become very much more difficult for the following reasons:
1. People are more talented and capable in general, and most entrepreneurial opportunities today are highly technical and require significant capital... thus putting them out of reach of regular folk even if bright and talented.
1. People are more talented and capable in general, and most entrepreneurial opportunities today are highly technical and require significant capital... thus putting them out of reach of regular folk even if bright and talented.
2. It is a global competition today instead of being contained domestically, or even within a community.
2. It is a global competition today instead of being contained domestically, or even within a community.
3. Corporate consolidation along with regulatory bloat has blocked many of the opportunities for upstarts.
3. Corporate consolidation along with regulatory bloat has blocked many of the opportunities for upstarts.
I think the dump of so many females into the education system, the profile of the average activist, with the feminist-pushed expectation that women can have it all and are deserving of it... has created a mess of female passive narcissism without the self-awareness that many are miserable pursuing careers like men... and in their core want a normie life of married with children... but they cannot admit it.  Being discontent with their lives, they are irritated and angry and turn to activism to break the system that makes them so miserable.
I think the dump of so many females into the education system, the profile of the average activist, with the feminist-pushed expectation that women can have it all and are deserving of it... has created a mess of female passive narcissism without the self-awareness that many are miserable pursuing careers like men... and in their core want a normie life of married with children... but they cannot admit it.  Being discontent with their lives, they are irritated and angry and turn to activism to break the system that makes them so miserable.
Watch the third season of the FX TV series Fargo set in the 1970s where Kirsten Dunst plays a brilliant part of a character that is a married woman seeking self-actualization.  She deserves a Emmy for that performance IMO.  This is final scene with Peggy, her character, being finally apprehended after months of her and her husband being involved in a cascade of stupid decisions after she hit and killed one of the sons of a mob boss with her car, and then running from the mob and the law.https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=m5mhlXE5G3g
Watch the third season of the FX TV series Fargo set in the 1970s where Kirsten Dunst plays a brilliant part of a character that is a married woman seeking self-actualization.  She deserves a Emmy for that performance IMO.  This is final scene with Peggy, her character, being finally apprehended after months of her and her husband being involved in a cascade of stupid decisions after she hit and killed one of the sons of a mob boss with her car, and then running from the mob and the law.https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=m5mhlXE5G3g
Like (2)
Reply
Share
Top
Latest
Discussions

Rob Henderson

Rob Henderson

Rob Henderson

Rob Henderson

Rob Henderson

Rob Henderson

Rob Henderson

Rob Henderson

Rob Henderson

Rob Henderson


undefined subscriptions will be displayed on your profile (edit)
Skip for now
For your security, we need to re-authenticate you.
Click the link we sent to sasha.p.podolsky@gmail.com, orclick here to sign in.