

1
Book meeting
Book a meeting
Below is a transcript, lightly edited, with some highlights frommy conversationaboutMad Menwith my friend Greg Owens, the Creative Director of GAS Music.
Below is a transcript, lightly edited, with some highlights from
about
with my friend Greg Owens, the Creative Director of GAS Music.
A reminder that Ill be atThe Expatlaunch partyin NYC on Saturday. Itll be nice to relax a little and attend someone elses book event. RSVPhere. If you see me around, come say hi.

in NYC on Saturday. Itll be nice to relax a little and attend someone elses book event. RSVP
. If you see me around, come say hi.
Greg: Today, once again, I'm with preeminent cultural critic and hopefully someone I can call a friend of mine, Rob Henderson.
: Today, once again, I'm with preeminent cultural critic and hopefully someone I can call a friend of mine, Rob Henderson.
Rob: Of course we're friends. Great to be here, Greg.
: Of course we're friends. Great to be here, Greg.
**
Greg: Rob and I decided that we were going to do a podcast a while ago where we take a critical eye to some landmark TV shows.The Sopranosis one of them. We'll touch on a bit of that today, but I've not finished it, so there'll be a bigger one later down the line to talk just aboutThe Sopranos. We're going to talk aboutMad Men, perhaps a little bit of delving intoThe West Wing. The reason I mentioned that we had this plan is because there is a sort of hypothesis I have about whyMad Menis so popular and why Don Draper is so relatable despite the fact that he seems like such an alienating character.
: Rob and I decided that we were going to do a podcast a while ago where we take a critical eye to some landmark TV shows.
is one of them. We'll touch on a bit of that today, but I've not finished it, so there'll be a bigger one later down the line to talk just about
. We're going to talk about
, perhaps a little bit of delving into
. The reason I mentioned that we had this plan is because there is a sort of hypothesis I have about why
is so popular and why Don Draper is so relatable despite the fact that he seems like such an alienating character.
Rob: Don is disconnected from himself and his emotions for many reasons. Because of his profession, emotion is commodified to some extent. If he experiences a powerful emotion, the gears start moving in his head, and he starts to think, "How can I use this feeling to sell soap or cigarettes or Coca-Cola to people?" When you detach from your own emotions in that way and constantly try to figure out, "What is it about this emotion that I'm feeling that can be used to sell merchandise to other people?" that in itself may be undermining his ability to authentically feel anything.
: Don is disconnected from himself and his emotions for many reasons. Because of his profession, emotion is commodified to some extent. If he experiences a powerful emotion, the gears start moving in his head, and he starts to think, "How can I use this feeling to sell soap or cigarettes or Coca-Cola to people?" When you detach from your own emotions in that way and constantly try to figure out, "What is it about this emotion that I'm feeling that can be used to sell merchandise to other people?" that in itself may be undermining his ability to authentically feel anything.
Greg: Isn't one of his first pieces of solid advice to Peggy, "Sex sells"? And he goes, "Says who? You are the product. You feeling something, that's what sells."
: Isn't one of his first pieces of solid advice to Peggy, "Sex sells"? And he goes, "Says who? You are the product. You feeling something, that's what sells."
Rob: Yes. That was an interesting scene. I initially watchedMad Menback when it was still on the air. I think I watched the first season in 2008. I want to say I think it aired right after... I was already watchingBreaking Bad, the first season ofBreaking Bad, which I think aired a year later.
: Yes. That was an interesting scene. I initially watched
back when it was still on the air. I think I watched the first season in 2008. I want to say I think it aired right after... I was already watching
, the first season of
, which I think aired a year later.
Greg: Was that before you were in the military?
: Was that before you were in the military?
Rob: It was while I was in. It was my first year in the military. I watched it more or less during the period when it was on the air, and then I did a re-watch during the lockdowns of 2020-2021. Doing this deep dive into it as a more mature person, someone who maybe understood a little bit more about not only the world but also by that point, I was in the midst of my PhD, so I understood something about psychology. In theMad Menseries, when Don says that famous line that critiquing the idea that sex sells, I had just read this study about how sexual content is inversely correlated with box office sales in movies. Essentially, the more sexual content that is in a movie, the fewer tickets those movies tend to sell. But interestingly, sexual content predicts the likelihood of winning an Oscar. Sexual content doesn't really appeal to the masses, it seems, but it does appeal to critics and taste-makers. Don had his finger on the pulse. He understood this. Its unclear if Matthew Weiner or whoever wrote that episode understood that sex doesn't sell, but that is supported by the empirical research. Don was correct there.
: It was while I was in. It was my first year in the military. I watched it more or less during the period when it was on the air, and then I did a re-watch during the lockdowns of 2020-2021. Doing this deep dive into it as a more mature person, someone who maybe understood a little bit more about not only the world but also by that point, I was in the midst of my PhD, so I understood something about psychology. In the
series, when Don says that famous line that critiquing the idea that sex sells, I had just read this study about how sexual content is inversely correlated with box office sales in movies. Essentially, the more sexual content that is in a movie, the fewer tickets those movies tend to sell. But interestingly, sexual content predicts the likelihood of winning an Oscar. Sexual content doesn't really appeal to the masses, it seems, but it does appeal to critics and taste-makers. Don had his finger on the pulse. He understood this. Its unclear if Matthew Weiner or whoever wrote that episode understood that sex doesn't sell, but that is supported by the empirical research. Don was correct there.
Greg: Jordan Peterson points out that dramatists can know things before people have figured them out in an academic sense. You know, acting them out, you'll know things you didn't know that you knew. That's kind of what's so fascinating aboutMad Menbecause many things about this show I think don't point towards huge success, critical and commercial. You know, it's a niche industry, advertising. You know,The Sopranos, there's something sexy about violence. There's something that's cool and gonna get people's attention. But executives making adverts, why did this get people's attention so much? For people watching, you kind of have to know the full backstory ofMad Men, which is explained in season one. Don Draper is the false identity. He really is farm-raised, uneducated Dick Whitman. Everyone else in Madison Avenue went to Princeton or Brown or Harvard. But he's more successful than all of them. And it's a successful persona, you know. And I wondered if part of the reason we all find Don Draper so fascinating is because all of us present some character to people and preserve a kind of inner real self, the real me. What do you think about that?
: Jordan Peterson points out that dramatists can know things before people have figured them out in an academic sense. You know, acting them out, you'll know things you didn't know that you knew. That's kind of what's so fascinating about
because many things about this show I think don't point towards huge success, critical and commercial. You know, it's a niche industry, advertising. You know,
, there's something sexy about violence. There's something that's cool and gonna get people's attention. But executives making adverts, why did this get people's attention so much? For people watching, you kind of have to know the full backstory of
, which is explained in season one. Don Draper is the false identity. He really is farm-raised, uneducated Dick Whitman. Everyone else in Madison Avenue went to Princeton or Brown or Harvard. But he's more successful than all of them. And it's a successful persona, you know. And I wondered if part of the reason we all find Don Draper so fascinating is because all of us present some character to people and preserve a kind of inner real self, the real me. What do you think about that?
Rob: Generally, I think that's right. There is this feeling among a lot of people, even if they have the educational pedigree or come from affluence, there is this sort of imposter syndrome that a lot of people feel. Don came from the sticks, grew up poor, and he reinvented himself. That in itself is a classic American story.
: Generally, I think that's right. There is this feeling among a lot of people, even if they have the educational pedigree or come from affluence, there is this sort of imposter syndrome that a lot of people feel. Don came from the sticks, grew up poor, and he reinvented himself. That in itself is a classic American story.
Greg: Well, that is the American dream. The question is, why is he so paralyzed by embarrassment of being the American dream?
: Well, that is the American dream. The question is, why is he so paralyzed by embarrassment of being the American dream?
Rob: He was around people who didn't have that. Remember the season six finale during the Hershey pitch when he comes clean to the clients.
: He was around people who didn't have that. Remember the season six finale during the Hershey pitch when he comes clean to the clients.
Greg: Well, even to his friends or family.
: Well, even to his friends or family.
Rob: Yeah, he comes clean to the clients and to everyone else. He does get put on a leave of absence, right? But it wasn't because of his background or for growing up poor. It was because he chose the exact wrong moment. Don has this famous line during the Hershey pitch when he breaks down and he says, "The wrapper looked like what was on the inside. The Hershey wrapper and the Hershey bar looked the same. Don himself wanted people to believe his wrapper, his persona, was who he really was on the inside.
: Yeah, he comes clean to the clients and to everyone else. He does get put on a leave of absence, right? But it wasn't because of his background or for growing up poor. It was because he chose the exact wrong moment. Don has this famous line during the Hershey pitch when he breaks down and he says, "The wrapper looked like what was on the inside. The Hershey wrapper and the Hershey bar looked the same. Don himself wanted people to believe his wrapper, his persona, was who he really was on the inside.
Rob: There was a scene earlier in the series where Don is talking to this client, Roger's old lover, where she's trying to sell dog food. Don suggests changing the label, and he says, "You know, the product is still good. It's just the label that needs to be replaced. Change the wrapper and the cover and the packaging." So that is an implicit theme throughout. The inside versus the outside. And Don was pushing for that. Anyway, after he reveals his real identity in season six, his colleagues and his wife are still there, right? No one abandons him. He keeps his job. People are upset with him, not because of his background, but just because of the professional faux pas that he made. But with the episode where he revealed himself to Betty, he did lose her. And the show is kind of ambiguous about whether he lost her because he was lying to her or whether it was because Betty came from this sort of waspy, well-moneyed background, and maybe to some extent she was shocked and perhaps embarrassed that she had married this man who was from a different social class than herself.
: There was a scene earlier in the series where Don is talking to this client, Roger's old lover, where she's trying to sell dog food. Don suggests changing the label, and he says, "You know, the product is still good. It's just the label that needs to be replaced. Change the wrapper and the cover and the packaging." So that is an implicit theme throughout. The inside versus the outside. And Don was pushing for that. Anyway, after he reveals his real identity in season six, his colleagues and his wife are still there, right? No one abandons him. He keeps his job. People are upset with him, not because of his background, but just because of the professional faux pas that he made. But with the episode where he revealed himself to Betty, he did lose her. And the show is kind of ambiguous about whether he lost her because he was lying to her or whether it was because Betty came from this sort of waspy, well-moneyed background, and maybe to some extent she was shocked and perhaps embarrassed that she had married this man who was from a different social class than herself.
Greg: One thing that's interesting in comparison is that Tony and Carmela Soprano, Tony is very up front about his infidelity. Carmela knows what Tony does. And also, so she knows what he does for a living basically, but without knowing the details. There's this weird implication withThe Sopranosthat if you're honest about your dishonesty, that you can try and maintain some of the structure, something like that.
: One thing that's interesting in comparison is that Tony and Carmela Soprano, Tony is very up front about his infidelity. Carmela knows what Tony does. And also, so she knows what he does for a living basically, but without knowing the details. There's this weird implication with
that if you're honest about your dishonesty, that you can try and maintain some of the structure, something like that.
Rob: It's the culture of the mafia, right? Like having a goomar, a mistress. Betty, I think, had suspicions as far back as season one, but she didn't have any proof until the second season when Bobby Barrett's husband, the comedian guy, just tells her. But in season one, Betty's friend Francine breaks down crying and basically discloses that her husband's been cheating on her. And then Betty conveys this information to Don and says something like, "How can you do that to someone you love?" And I think when she said this to Don at dinner later that day, she was looking for some kind of reassurance from Don that he wasn't doing that to her. And instead, Don says, "Who knows why people do what they do."
: It's the culture of the mafia, right? Like having a goomar, a mistress. Betty, I think, had suspicions as far back as season one, but she didn't have any proof until the second season when Bobby Barrett's husband, the comedian guy, just tells her. But in season one, Betty's friend Francine breaks down crying and basically discloses that her husband's been cheating on her. And then Betty conveys this information to Don and says something like, "How can you do that to someone you love?" And I think when she said this to Don at dinner later that day, she was looking for some kind of reassurance from Don that he wasn't doing that to her. And instead, Don says, "Who knows why people do what they do."
Greg: Whoa, yeah.
: Whoa, yeah.
Rob: Which is probably not the right thing to say to your wife who's telling you that her best friend is being cheated on. But in that moment, she had already had suspicions, and that was when it was more or less confirmed in her mind, but she didn't have material evidence.
: Which is probably not the right thing to say to your wife who's telling you that her best friend is being cheated on. But in that moment, she had already had suspicions, and that was when it was more or less confirmed in her mind, but she didn't have material evidence.
Greg: His inability to join in the moral judgment.
: His inability to join in the moral judgment.
Rob: Yeah, exactly.
: Yeah, exactly.
Rob: Exactly, yeah. There's also this popular video essay that claims that everyone thinks they're like Don Draper, but really they're more like Pete Campbell.
: Exactly, yeah. There's also this popular video essay that claims that everyone thinks they're like Don Draper, but really they're more like Pete Campbell.
Greg: I saw that one.
: I saw that one.
Rob: Even Don Draper isnt really Don Draper because he is self-consciously a fabricated character. Hes styled himself based on the Hollywood heroes of his era.
: Even Don Draper isnt really Don Draper because he is self-consciously a fabricated character. Hes styled himself based on the Hollywood heroes of his era.
Greg: Gregory Peck
: Gregory Peck
Rob: Sean Connery, James Bond.
: Sean Connery, James Bond.
Greg: Yeah, a bit of Bogart.
: Yeah, a bit of Bogart.
Rob: Dick Whitman created this advertisement for himself. Don Draper is a product. One of the ironies of the show is that Don Draper is not even Don Draper. He's a walking advertisement for success despite on the inside feeling self-conscious and insecure. In the very first episode ofMad Men, Don is simultaneously portrayed as a master of the universe but also extremely insecure and scared. The opening scene, right, he's with Midge in bed smoking a cigarette and says something like, "I have no good ideas for my Lucky Strike account." And he has this line about the young executives are going to be picking meat off my bones.
: Dick Whitman created this advertisement for himself. Don Draper is a product. One of the ironies of the show is that Don Draper is not even Don Draper. He's a walking advertisement for success despite on the inside feeling self-conscious and insecure. In the very first episode of
, Don is simultaneously portrayed as a master of the universe but also extremely insecure and scared. The opening scene, right, he's with Midge in bed smoking a cigarette and says something like, "I have no good ideas for my Lucky Strike account." And he has this line about the young executives are going to be picking meat off my bones.
Greg: Losing my edge.
: Losing my edge.
Rob: Right up until the moment when he has the flash of brilliance and creates the "It's toasted" tagline, you see this man who's actually uncertain of himself. And then he pulls a rabbit out of the hat at the last minute. And then you see from there he transitions into this person who's seemingly cool and suave. But the first half of that episode in the pilot is like, "My career is over."
: Right up until the moment when he has the flash of brilliance and creates the "It's toasted" tagline, you see this man who's actually uncertain of himself. And then he pulls a rabbit out of the hat at the last minute. And then you see from there he transitions into this person who's seemingly cool and suave. But the first half of that episode in the pilot is like, "My career is over."
Greg: And it's weird that they let you into that side of him first. Everyone else sees it the other way around. So obviously you're firmly on his side the whole time. You kind of know all the secrets before the audience does. You mentioned the other day that people are often confused by the fact that they like Tony Soprano. You kind of know why you sympathize with Don. He has infidelities, as does Tony. But inThe Sopranos, infidelity is the least of Tony's crimes. So why do people like him so much?
: And it's weird that they let you into that side of him first. Everyone else sees it the other way around. So obviously you're firmly on his side the whole time. You kind of know all the secrets before the audience does. You mentioned the other day that people are often confused by the fact that they like Tony Soprano. You kind of know why you sympathize with Don. He has infidelities, as does Tony. But in
, infidelity is the least of Tony's crimes. So why do people like him so much?
Rob: Yeah Tony's behavior is more reprehensible than Don's. There are multiple questions about why he was able to win the audience over. Don Draper has built-in advantages. Despite being an anti-hero, despite committing morally reprehensible acts, Jon Hamm is a good-looking guy. He's like if AI had created a movie star. And he's not good-looking in the effete pretty boy way that would appeal only to women. There's a masculinity to him that men respect too. The square jaw, the build.
: Yeah Tony's behavior is more reprehensible than Don's. There are multiple questions about why he was able to win the audience over. Don Draper has built-in advantages. Despite being an anti-hero, despite committing morally reprehensible acts, Jon Hamm is a good-looking guy. He's like if AI had created a movie star. And he's not good-looking in the effete pretty boy way that would appeal only to women. There's a masculinity to him that men respect too. The square jaw, the build.
Greg: His voice.
: His voice.
Rob: Whereas Tony, James Gandolfini... Gandolfinis portrayal of Tony is the greatest portrayal of any character in any medium, like movies, theater, at least that I've seen and that I'm aware of. And to be able to carry that role for six seasons. Tony himself is not especially good-looking. He's like a regular-looking middle-aged man. I've read some interesting articles and interviews with David Chase, the creator ofThe Sopranos. Initially, when they were trying to cast for Tony Soprano, they had Michael Rispoli, who later played Jackie Aprile Sr. in season one.
: Whereas Tony, James Gandolfini... Gandolfinis portrayal of Tony is the greatest portrayal of any character in any medium, like movies, theater, at least that I've seen and that I'm aware of. And to be able to carry that role for six seasons. Tony himself is not especially good-looking. He's like a regular-looking middle-aged man. I've read some interesting articles and interviews with David Chase, the creator of
. Initially, when they were trying to cast for Tony Soprano, they had Michael Rispoli, who later played Jackie Aprile Sr. in season one.
Greg: Jackie Jr.'s father.
: Jackie Jr.'s father.
Rob: Yeah. They wanted him initially to play Tony. He was slightly better looking and he had a full head of hair. He was a little overweight. He was almost like a better-looking version of James Gandolfini. But then when they had Gandolfini in to read for the role, David Chase was like, "In the real world, thats what he would look like." So they ended up casting Gandolfini as Tony. Theres this sort of charisma, this larger-than-life quality to him. Theres the inherently interesting duality to his character, similar to Don in that sense. Tony is a mafia boss, he's a violent criminal, but the show opens with him in therapy. In that vulnerable position. He cries in the pilot episode.
: Yeah. They wanted him initially to play Tony. He was slightly better looking and he had a full head of hair. He was a little overweight. He was almost like a better-looking version of James Gandolfini. But then when they had Gandolfini in to read for the role, David Chase was like, "In the real world, thats what he would look like." So they ended up casting Gandolfini as Tony. Theres this sort of charisma, this larger-than-life quality to him. Theres the inherently interesting duality to his character, similar to Don in that sense. Tony is a mafia boss, he's a violent criminal, but the show opens with him in therapy. In that vulnerable position. He cries in the pilot episode.
Greg: Tony, it's in the first five minutes. And he's crying not over horrific acts he's committed but because he's scared of losing his family.
: Tony, it's in the first five minutes. And he's crying not over horrific acts he's committed but because he's scared of losing his family.
Rob: Yeah, right, with the ducks in the pool and Melfi's sort of Freudian reading of what that means. That wins us over to him and helps us to understand him. The other thing I think is interesting about Tony that the audience responds to is that Tony is in fact often uncomfortable with his violent acts. We understand that he was sort of forced into this life because that's who his father was. All of the male role models he had in his life were in the mafia. This life was chosen in advance for him. He gets into these debates with Dr. Melfi about free will. And he says, "How come I'm not making pots in Peru?" And she tries to tell him, "Well, we have choices and our destinies aren't set in stone."
: Yeah, right, with the ducks in the pool and Melfi's sort of Freudian reading of what that means. That wins us over to him and helps us to understand him. The other thing I think is interesting about Tony that the audience responds to is that Tony is in fact often uncomfortable with his violent acts. We understand that he was sort of forced into this life because that's who his father was. All of the male role models he had in his life were in the mafia. This life was chosen in advance for him. He gets into these debates with Dr. Melfi about free will. And he says, "How come I'm not making pots in Peru?" And she tries to tell him, "Well, we have choices and our destinies aren't set in stone."
Greg: Tony's like, "You're born into this. You are what you are."
: Tony's like, "You're born into this. You are what you are."
Rob: Yeah, which is why he's so distraught about his son. He's like, "How are we gonna save this kid?" And that's the other thing, right? We understand why Tony actually isn't comfortable with his chosen path because he tries so hard to keep his kids away from it. He doesn't want AJ to be inducted into the crew. He does everything he can to ensure they're not in that life of organized crime. He encourages Meadow to go to college. He and Carmela are very proud when she goes off to Columbia. They want her to be a doctor. At one point, Tony in a session with Melfi says, "I want her to be a pediatrician and just get far away from me." There are more layers to Tony Soprano than any other anti-hero, including Don. Don is complex and interesting too, but maybe because of his looks we just infer complexity onto him, and maybe it's not quite as deep as we think. Although there is clearly a lot of depth there.
: Yeah, which is why he's so distraught about his son. He's like, "How are we gonna save this kid?" And that's the other thing, right? We understand why Tony actually isn't comfortable with his chosen path because he tries so hard to keep his kids away from it. He doesn't want AJ to be inducted into the crew. He does everything he can to ensure they're not in that life of organized crime. He encourages Meadow to go to college. He and Carmela are very proud when she goes off to Columbia. They want her to be a doctor. At one point, Tony in a session with Melfi says, "I want her to be a pediatrician and just get far away from me." There are more layers to Tony Soprano than any other anti-hero, including Don. Don is complex and interesting too, but maybe because of his looks we just infer complexity onto him, and maybe it's not quite as deep as we think. Although there is clearly a lot of depth there.
Greg: Remember he has to fire a copywriter who says to him, "Don, some of us have character. You don't have character, you're just handsome." They actually put that in the show, what you're suggesting.
: Remember he has to fire a copywriter who says to him, "Don, some of us have character. You don't have character, you're just handsome." They actually put that in the show, what you're suggesting.
Rob: Did Don have a strong moral character? I think he did, compared to the other guys in the office. They did this with Tony too, where Tony is a monster, but if you compare him to some of the other guys in his crew or the unsavory rivals they pit him against, like Ralph Cifaretto, Tony is comparatively less monstrous than they are. Don is the same. Pete Campbell in season one, he was such a great foil in that season one arc where Pete is trying to blackmail Don. What was going on with Pete? He was an accounts man, but he wanted to be in creative.
: Did Don have a strong moral character? I think he did, compared to the other guys in the office. They did this with Tony too, where Tony is a monster, but if you compare him to some of the other guys in his crew or the unsavory rivals they pit him against, like Ralph Cifaretto, Tony is comparatively less monstrous than they are. Don is the same. Pete Campbell in season one, he was such a great foil in that season one arc where Pete is trying to blackmail Don. What was going on with Pete? He was an accounts man, but he wanted to be in creative.
Greg: Yes. That is more of a nod to the industry than something that could be widely understood in the broader culture. Because in advertising, classically, the creatives were king. They are making the thing that will cure your business problems. They're the top of the hierarchy. That's why it's appropriate inMad Menthat Don is revered like a king by client and by colleague alike. Pete Campbell jumps right in, saying "I have ideas, direct marketing. I thought of that. It turns out it already existed, but I came up with it independently."
: Yes. That is more of a nod to the industry than something that could be widely understood in the broader culture. Because in advertising, classically, the creatives were king. They are making the thing that will cure your business problems. They're the top of the hierarchy. That's why it's appropriate in
that Don is revered like a king by client and by colleague alike. Pete Campbell jumps right in, saying "I have ideas, direct marketing. I thought of that. It turns out it already existed, but I came up with it independently."
Rob: I'm here for the Greg impressions.
: I'm here for the Greg impressions.
Greg: I'm going to try not to do too many because I bet they're good in person, bad on YouTube. What I mean is, yeah, it definitely happens in the industry that people would like to be creatives because as well, creative is a romantic title, isn't it? It's like saying visionary or artist, with a professional thing attached to it.
: I'm going to try not to do too many because I bet they're good in person, bad on YouTube. What I mean is, yeah, it definitely happens in the industry that people would like to be creatives because as well, creative is a romantic title, isn't it? It's like saying visionary or artist, with a professional thing attached to it.
Rob: Don says, "Sterling Cooper has more failed artists and intellectuals than the Third Reich."
: Don says, "Sterling Cooper has more failed artists and intellectuals than the Third Reich."
Greg: There you go, absolutely.
: There you go, absolutely.
Rob: You see the value they place on creativity. I'm thinking of that scene in season one where Ken Cosgrove gets an article published inThe Atlantic Monthly.
: You see the value they place on creativity. I'm thinking of that scene in season one where Ken Cosgrove gets an article published in
.
Greg: Exactly, an account man crossing over.
: Exactly, an account man crossing over.
Rob: Doing something creative. He wrote a fictional short story that got into this prestigious magazine. Pete was envious, and Paul, a creative, they were like, "You write? You're paid to write?"
: Doing something creative. He wrote a fictional short story that got into this prestigious magazine. Pete was envious, and Paul, a creative, they were like, "You write? You're paid to write?"
Greg: Yeah, exactly.
: Yeah, exactly.
Rob: Theres the scene where Pete announces to the senior execs, something like, "I have these creative ideas, but then I get here and you all tell me I'm good with people, which is strange because I've never heard that before."
: Theres the scene where Pete announces to the senior execs, something like, "I have these creative ideas, but then I get here and you all tell me I'm good with people, which is strange because I've never heard that before."
Greg: One of the funniest lines in the whole series.
: One of the funniest lines in the whole series.
Rob: Behind the scenes, when they're all in Bert Cooper's office, you understand why they put him in that accounts role. His family name. His family, they're blue-blooded WASPs, well-moneyed. They go way back in New York City.
: Behind the scenes, when they're all in Bert Cooper's office, you understand why they put him in that accounts role. His family name. His family, they're blue-blooded WASPs, well-moneyed. They go way back in New York City.
Greg: Big American industrialists.
: Big American industrialists.
Rob: Theres a pedigree to Petes name. Hes a bauble of status for the agency. For him to be working there, that's right. To trot him out to go play golf with the clients is a big deal for the agency. Pete has the pedigree but not necessarily the talent, at least in the creative domain. Whereas Don has the talent in the creative domain but doesn't have the pedigree.
: Theres a pedigree to Petes name. Hes a bauble of status for the agency. For him to be working there, that's right. To trot him out to go play golf with the clients is a big deal for the agency. Pete has the pedigree but not necessarily the talent, at least in the creative domain. Whereas Don has the talent in the creative domain but doesn't have the pedigree.
Greg: Roger Sterling says to him, "You're better at relationships because you don't value them."
: Roger Sterling says to him, "You're better at relationships because you don't value them."
Rob: Don could never be an accounts man. He has that haughty artistic temperament.
: Don could never be an accounts man. He has that haughty artistic temperament.
Greg: Exactly.
: Exactly.
Rob: One thing that I found interesting throughout that whole series was how Don didnt have much of a character arc. He starts out being unfaithful to his wife, unhappy with his job, feeling unfulfilled, and he kind of ends that way too. He has a couple of breakthroughs, he might have made incremental progress. He does come clean about his identity. Whereas Pete truly transforms. If you compare season one Pete to the finale, when he's getting on the plane with Trudy, and she re-invites him into the marriage, they get back together. Pete is a very different person at the end. In the beginning, youd rather hang out with Don than Pete. But by the end, youd rather hang out with Pete than with Don. Season one Pete is slimy, backstabby, you wouldn't trust anyone around that guy.
: One thing that I found interesting throughout that whole series was how Don didnt have much of a character arc. He starts out being unfaithful to his wife, unhappy with his job, feeling unfulfilled, and he kind of ends that way too. He has a couple of breakthroughs, he might have made incremental progress. He does come clean about his identity. Whereas Pete truly transforms. If you compare season one Pete to the finale, when he's getting on the plane with Trudy, and she re-invites him into the marriage, they get back together. Pete is a very different person at the end. In the beginning, youd rather hang out with Don than Pete. But by the end, youd rather hang out with Pete than with Don. Season one Pete is slimy, backstabby, you wouldn't trust anyone around that guy.
Greg: Truly the most hated character all the way through. I wonder if part of what's going on with Don is that we start out and Don's 36. Maybe we've missed his arc, and we're just seeing it on repeat. A lot of people's conclusion of the ending ofMad Menis that you're about to see the whole thing just reset and start again. I don't like that interpretation. I want it to be a transcendence.
: Truly the most hated character all the way through. I wonder if part of what's going on with Don is that we start out and Don's 36. Maybe we've missed his arc, and we're just seeing it on repeat. A lot of people's conclusion of the ending of
is that you're about to see the whole thing just reset and start again. I don't like that interpretation. I want it to be a transcendence.
Rob: Youre talking about the end when he's at that quasi-spiritual retreat and he's meditating and smiling. Then it cuts to the Coke commercial.
: Youre talking about the end when he's at that quasi-spiritual retreat and he's meditating and smiling. Then it cuts to the Coke commercial.
Greg: Yes. What did you take? I think Rob's about to do the cynical interpretation of the end ofMad Men. So let's have it. Rob Henderson's cynical take.
: Yes. What did you take? I think Rob's about to do the cynical interpretation of the end of
. So let's have it. Rob Henderson's cynical take.
Rob: So the cynical interpretation is that Don does what he always does, which is he experiences some kind of pleasurable emotion. He makes a bit of internal progress in his journey, and then where his mind goes next is, "How can I commodify this feeling to sell a product?" When I rewatched it, I noticed throughout that final season, Coca-Cola symbolism is everywhere. It's pervasive. People try to win Don over to McCann Erickson with dangling Coca-Cola saying, "If you want to work for them, come with us." There's a scene where Don is at the motel, and he tries to help fix the Coca-Cola machine. Then the end is a Coca-Cola commercial. The show is trying to beat you over the head with, "Hey, Don's about to sell some Coca-Cola here at the end." The less cynical view, which I'm less inclined to believe, is that it was an iconic commercial, and it's just sort of setting up this parallel of the good feeling you get from this commercial is the same feeling that Don got when he was at that retreat. He did transcend and make progress. There's probably endless interpretations, but those were two that came to mind when I watched it the second time.
: So the cynical interpretation is that Don does what he always does, which is he experiences some kind of pleasurable emotion. He makes a bit of internal progress in his journey, and then where his mind goes next is, "How can I commodify this feeling to sell a product?" When I rewatched it, I noticed throughout that final season, Coca-Cola symbolism is everywhere. It's pervasive. People try to win Don over to McCann Erickson with dangling Coca-Cola saying, "If you want to work for them, come with us." There's a scene where Don is at the motel, and he tries to help fix the Coca-Cola machine. Then the end is a Coca-Cola commercial. The show is trying to beat you over the head with, "Hey, Don's about to sell some Coca-Cola here at the end." The less cynical view, which I'm less inclined to believe, is that it was an iconic commercial, and it's just sort of setting up this parallel of the good feeling you get from this commercial is the same feeling that Don got when he was at that retreat. He did transcend and make progress. There's probably endless interpretations, but those were two that came to mind when I watched it the second time.
Greg: So yeah, just to box those, the one interpretation is that he experienced something, figured out that he could make a killing, went back to McCann, and made that commercial.
: So yeah, just to box those, the one interpretation is that he experienced something, figured out that he could make a killing, went back to McCann, and made that commercial.
Rob: Yes, that's one interpretation.
: Yes, that's one interpretation.
Greg: The extreme other interpretation, not naive, but the other end of the spectrum is that he achieved enlightenment. He found peace by focusing on the inner self in a meditative way. There's the symbolism of the fact that he was by the cliffs, he had nowhere left to run, he'd reached the end of the line, so he had to look somewhere else for the answer, and maybe he found it.
: The extreme other interpretation, not naive, but the other end of the spectrum is that he achieved enlightenment. He found peace by focusing on the inner self in a meditative way. There's the symbolism of the fact that he was by the cliffs, he had nowhere left to run, he'd reached the end of the line, so he had to look somewhere else for the answer, and maybe he found it.
Rob: Hmm.
: Hmm.
Greg: But there's a tertiary element to it, which is that it predicted what has been the obsession of advertising, of idealistic young people being completely harnessable by brands as well.
: But there's a tertiary element to it, which is that it predicted what has been the obsession of advertising, of idealistic young people being completely harnessable by brands as well.
Rob: I watched this interview with Matthew Weiner that took place shortly after the finale aired. Matthew Weiner was cagey about whether there was an objective interpretation of the ending, but one thing he did say was that commercial, it wasn't intended to be a cynical ending. Matthew Weiner made this point that five or ten years before that commercial aired, you couldn't show advertisements with black people and white people together in the same commercial. In that Coca-Cola commercial, it's a famous commercial where they have people from all over the world, different races, backgrounds, and so forth, all together with a Coca-Cola. It does have this hopeful message. Yes, they're selling sugar water, but the message and the imagery and the interpretation of it is actually pretty hopeful and optimistic.
: I watched this interview with Matthew Weiner that took place shortly after the finale aired. Matthew Weiner was cagey about whether there was an objective interpretation of the ending, but one thing he did say was that commercial, it wasn't intended to be a cynical ending. Matthew Weiner made this point that five or ten years before that commercial aired, you couldn't show advertisements with black people and white people together in the same commercial. In that Coca-Cola commercial, it's a famous commercial where they have people from all over the world, different races, backgrounds, and so forth, all together with a Coca-Cola. It does have this hopeful message. Yes, they're selling sugar water, but the message and the imagery and the interpretation of it is actually pretty hopeful and optimistic.
**
Rob: You and I had talked before about how one of the undercurrents of the show is the theme of the haunted veteran. Don is a veteran of the Korean War, Roger was a veteran of World War II, and Duck Phillips as well.
: You and I had talked before about how one of the undercurrents of the show is the theme of the haunted veteran. Don is a veteran of the Korean War, Roger was a veteran of World War II, and Duck Phillips as well.
Greg: Duck Phillips in Okinawa.
: Duck Phillips in Okinawa.
Rob: It was a major part of American culture in the mid-twentieth century. These guys are doing their best despite these horrific experiences they had. They're doing their best to put on the suit, get on the train every morning, go to work, behave like civilized men after spending their early adulthood, their formative years, witnessing death and violence and destruction.
: It was a major part of American culture in the mid-twentieth century. These guys are doing their best despite these horrific experiences they had. They're doing their best to put on the suit, get on the train every morning, go to work, behave like civilized men after spending their early adulthood, their formative years, witnessing death and violence and destruction.
Greg: That's something that bindsThe SopranosandMad Men. It's both about men that are traumatized by violence they've committed as well.
: That's something that binds
and
. It's both about men that are traumatized by violence they've committed as well.
Rob: Oh yeah, that's an interesting parallel too. Tony's character, he commits... It's direct with him, right? You actually see him commit all of this violence and then go home, which I think is another compelling element to him. The way they sort of domesticated Tony with the look of the bathrobe and the boxers and the wife beater, he just looks like this suburban Jersey dad going down to get the newspaper.
: Oh yeah, that's an interesting parallel too. Tony's character, he commits... It's direct with him, right? You actually see him commit all of this violence and then go home, which I think is another compelling element to him. The way they sort of domesticated Tony with the look of the bathrobe and the boxers and the wife beater, he just looks like this suburban Jersey dad going down to get the newspaper.
Greg: It's hard to fear him when he looks like that.
: It's hard to fear him when he looks like that.
Rob: Yeah, right. He can turn it on and off on a dime where he'll go murder someone and then go home and be this suburban dad trying to be a good father and a good husband. Weirdly, he may have been a better husband and father than Don despite his infidelities. Perhaps it is that sort of the legacy of the Catholic Italian cultural value that they assign to family. Then also maybe that Carmela sort of easily understood the arrangement that they had where Tony would have these girlfriends on the side, but Tony would always come home for dinner. Whereas Don, he would just disappear for two weeks and leave his kids.
: Yeah, right. He can turn it on and off on a dime where he'll go murder someone and then go home and be this suburban dad trying to be a good father and a good husband. Weirdly, he may have been a better husband and father than Don despite his infidelities. Perhaps it is that sort of the legacy of the Catholic Italian cultural value that they assign to family. Then also maybe that Carmela sort of easily understood the arrangement that they had where Tony would have these girlfriends on the side, but Tony would always come home for dinner. Whereas Don, he would just disappear for two weeks and leave his kids.
Greg: The interesting contrast between those two shows is that they're both about men succeeding in the most spectacular way in both legitimate and illegitimate ways. One's at the top and one's at the bottom of the American dream or the hierarchy or whatever the socio-political accepted order. Both being bad family men. To your question, who's the better father? That's a tough question. Bizarrely enough, Tony Soprano is more genuinely concerned for his children than Don Draper is. Tony is distraught at the end of season three because AJ gets expelled. Tony sees that as yet another inevitable step on the way to the life of crime. He's saying, "How can we save this kid?" He's almost in tears. He actually cares that his kid does well, but for some reason, he never makes the connection that if you just spend time with him and do good things with him, then job done. Don doesn't have those questions. The children are often regarded inMad Menlike inconveniences. You remember in the first episode, Betty finds Sally with a plastic bag over her head and says, "My clothes that were once in that bag better not be ruined."
: The interesting contrast between those two shows is that they're both about men succeeding in the most spectacular way in both legitimate and illegitimate ways. One's at the top and one's at the bottom of the American dream or the hierarchy or whatever the socio-political accepted order. Both being bad family men. To your question, who's the better father? That's a tough question. Bizarrely enough, Tony Soprano is more genuinely concerned for his children than Don Draper is. Tony is distraught at the end of season three because AJ gets expelled. Tony sees that as yet another inevitable step on the way to the life of crime. He's saying, "How can we save this kid?" He's almost in tears. He actually cares that his kid does well, but for some reason, he never makes the connection that if you just spend time with him and do good things with him, then job done. Don doesn't have those questions. The children are often regarded in
like inconveniences. You remember in the first episode, Betty finds Sally with a plastic bag over her head and says, "My clothes that were once in that bag better not be ruined."
Rob: Tony is a higher variance character in that he does care more about the kids, but he also places them in way more danger. Just by living in that house, he is placing all of their lives at risk with the wars that he has with the other mafia families, with all of the people that his underlings deal with, the gang wars, all of the violent activities that he's involved in, and all of these extra-legal activities. He does place them at risk, but in his own mind, he may not think of it that way. He probably thinks that by being there, he's keeping them safe or something along those lines. Actually, he's putting them in increased risk of danger. Don, there's this absentee quality to it too, which I guess is maybe a commentary of that era as well. The baby boomer generation, Sally Draper is a baby boomer. My understanding is that those kids were sort of overlooked and neglected by their fathers who were veterans of the war who were sort of emotionally checked out the way Don is. Their mothers, maybe their attention was spread too thin with trying to care for the house, for the family, for their husbands, and also maybe feeling like they missed out on their careers. There's that aspect too. The show is about their failings as family men despite at least attempting to try. In their careers, both Tony and Don are both inordinately successful.
: Tony is a higher variance character in that he does care more about the kids, but he also places them in way more danger. Just by living in that house, he is placing all of their lives at risk with the wars that he has with the other mafia families, with all of the people that his underlings deal with, the gang wars, all of the violent activities that he's involved in, and all of these extra-legal activities. He does place them at risk, but in his own mind, he may not think of it that way. He probably thinks that by being there, he's keeping them safe or something along those lines. Actually, he's putting them in increased risk of danger. Don, there's this absentee quality to it too, which I guess is maybe a commentary of that era as well. The baby boomer generation, Sally Draper is a baby boomer. My understanding is that those kids were sort of overlooked and neglected by their fathers who were veterans of the war who were sort of emotionally checked out the way Don is. Their mothers, maybe their attention was spread too thin with trying to care for the house, for the family, for their husbands, and also maybe feeling like they missed out on their careers. There's that aspect too. The show is about their failings as family men despite at least attempting to try. In their careers, both Tony and Don are both inordinately successful.
Greg: I like how the show treats Don as a highly sought-after person. All these other agencies are constantly fighting over him.
: I like how the show treats Don as a highly sought-after person. All these other agencies are constantly fighting over him.
Rob: That's strange from an advertising professional perspective. The only thing that doesn't make sense about the show is everyone seems really, really impressed by Draper and his way. There's a mystique. What's he doing over there? But Sterling Cooper isn't particularly high up in the business leaderboards. The big ones are still there: Ogilvy, McCann.
: That's strange from an advertising professional perspective. The only thing that doesn't make sense about the show is everyone seems really, really impressed by Draper and his way. There's a mystique. What's he doing over there? But Sterling Cooper isn't particularly high up in the business leaderboards. The big ones are still there: Ogilvy, McCann.
Greg: What was the implication there?
: What was the implication there?
Rob: At least initially, my understanding was the reason why Don liked Sterling Cooper. First, it was his big break. We could talk about that scene too with Roger, how he sort of maneuvers his way into that position. But then also, Don didn't have a contract.
: At least initially, my understanding was the reason why Don liked Sterling Cooper. First, it was his big break. We could talk about that scene too with Roger, how he sort of maneuvers his way into that position. But then also, Don didn't have a contract.
Greg: That's right.
: That's right.
Rob: That's a key aspect of his character. He's flighty. He's worried. He's stolen another man's identity. He's technically breaking the law just by being called Don Draper. He likes not having the contract. The scene where he gets hired, there was that flashback. How did it happen? He was a fur coat salesman.
: That's a key aspect of his character. He's flighty. He's worried. He's stolen another man's identity. He's technically breaking the law just by being called Don Draper. He likes not having the contract. The scene where he gets hired, there was that flashback. How did it happen? He was a fur coat salesman.
Greg: Roger was trying to buy a coat for, I presume, his mistress.
: Roger was trying to buy a coat for, I presume, his mistress.
Rob: It was Joan.
: It was Joan.
Greg: Yeah, he buys a fur coat for when they're still carrying on their affair.
: Yeah, he buys a fur coat for when they're still carrying on their affair.
Rob: This must have been in the mid-'50s.
: This must have been in the mid-'50s.
Greg: Otherwise, the implication is that Don rose to creative director in like four years, which is unlikely.
: Otherwise, the implication is that Don rose to creative director in like four years, which is unlikely.
Rob: The timeline... A lot of shows, the timelines don't completely make sense. Sometimes the writers have to do what they call retconning, where they readjust the timeline to get things to make sense. If Don is the creative director in 1960, the Korean War, he was there in 1951. He somehow met Betty, had kids, rose to creative director all in the span of nine years. That's kind of hard to believe.
: The timeline... A lot of shows, the timelines don't completely make sense. Sometimes the writers have to do what they call retconning, where they readjust the timeline to get things to make sense. If Don is the creative director in 1960, the Korean War, he was there in 1951. He somehow met Betty, had kids, rose to creative director all in the span of nine years. That's kind of hard to believe.
[side note: It just occurred to me that it has been 9 years since I left the military and my life today would be unrecognizable to the 2015 version of Rob Henderson. A lot can happen in a short amount of time if you are desperate, industrious, andof courselucky.]
Greg: Someone also gets the sense that really they wanted Don to be in World War II, but he was just too young.
: Someone also gets the sense that really they wanted Don to be in World War II, but he was just too young.
Rob: Yeah, too young. The character must have been born in 1925. He could have technically, but he would have been extremely young. It also would have been difficult with the makeup and digital to get Don to look like he was 18 years old in World War II versus 25.
: Yeah, too young. The character must have been born in 1925. He could have technically, but he would have been extremely young. It also would have been difficult with the makeup and digital to get Don to look like he was 18 years old in World War II versus 25.
**
Greg: You rose to some online prominence because you wrotea New York Times articleabout understanding class throughThe West WingandThe Fresh Prince. I thoughtThe Fresh Princewas also interesting because, likeMad MenandThe Sopranos, it's an example of people succeeding in the American dream. Only this time, the successful alpha male is not the protagonist. InFresh Prince, it's Philip Banks. It's not about Phil, it's about bothering Uncle Phil. What was it about these two shows that really got your attention and you learned something through them?
: You rose to some online prominence because you wrote
about understanding class through
and
. I thought
was also interesting because, like
and
, it's an example of people succeeding in the American dream. Only this time, the successful alpha male is not the protagonist. In
, it's Philip Banks. It's not about Phil, it's about bothering Uncle Phil. What was it about these two shows that really got your attention and you learned something through them?
Rob: Yeah, the backstory... I grew up watchingThe Fresh Princejust as a kid, watching the reruns because that show aired in the early '90s. I didn't watch it until later, the reruns on Nick at Night or something. I connected with this show because I had this experience when I was growing up of trying to figure out what direction to take. I was growing up in foster homes in L.A., bouncing around a lot, very aimless. I was terrible in school, barely graduated high school. There was something interesting aboutFresh Princewhere it was a fish-out-of-water show. Will, the theme of the show, gets into a fight, his aunt says, "You're moving with your Auntie and Uncle in Bel-Air." He goes to move in with Aunt Viv and Uncle Phil. You're seeing that world through Will's eyes, his interactions with Carlton, who goes to a prep school. For Carlton, it was never a question of if he would go to college, it was, "Is he going to go to Princeton or somewhere else?" For Will, college just wasn't on his radar. He was growing up raised by a single mom in Philadelphia and just wasn't a focused student, although he was revealed to be academically gifted. He takes a test and outperforms Carlton on one of the standardized tests in the show. I resonated with that about the class elements. I wondered why Carlton cared so much about going to college because his family was already rich. WithThe West Wing, I watched it years later on the advice of someone who was a college graduate. By that point, I was starting to take my education more seriously. I was still enlisted at that point, but I was starting to consider actually going on to higher education and pursue that as a path. When someone who graduated from college tells you, "Hey, you should watchThe West Wing," I'm like, "Okay, I'll check this out. Maybe I can glean something useful from it." I also had this concern that if this person is recommending the show to me, what if I get to college and people ask me about this show and I don't know what they're talking about? I watched the first two seasons, I didn't actually enjoy the show that much, but there were elements of that show that appealed to me. The characters, the way that they would brag about their educations. There's a scene where C.J. Cregg, the communications director, asks President Bartlet, "Why did you go to Notre Dame? You got into Harvard, Yale, and Williams, all these other fancy schools." I'm like, "Okay, these people love college." They're always talking about their educational pedigree. This guy Bartlet is literally the President of the United States, who cares where he went to college? But that's something they focused on. That was interesting to me as well, the way the characters talked and spoke. Later on, I did grow to enjoy Aaron Sorkin's movies. I lovedMolly's Game.
: Yeah, the backstory... I grew up watching
just as a kid, watching the reruns because that show aired in the early '90s. I didn't watch it until later, the reruns on Nick at Night or something. I connected with this show because I had this experience when I was growing up of trying to figure out what direction to take. I was growing up in foster homes in L.A., bouncing around a lot, very aimless. I was terrible in school, barely graduated high school. There was something interesting about
where it was a fish-out-of-water show. Will, the theme of the show, gets into a fight, his aunt says, "You're moving with your Auntie and Uncle in Bel-Air." He goes to move in with Aunt Viv and Uncle Phil. You're seeing that world through Will's eyes, his interactions with Carlton, who goes to a prep school. For Carlton, it was never a question of if he would go to college, it was, "Is he going to go to Princeton or somewhere else?" For Will, college just wasn't on his radar. He was growing up raised by a single mom in Philadelphia and just wasn't a focused student, although he was revealed to be academically gifted. He takes a test and outperforms Carlton on one of the standardized tests in the show. I resonated with that about the class elements. I wondered why Carlton cared so much about going to college because his family was already rich. With
, I watched it years later on the advice of someone who was a college graduate. By that point, I was starting to take my education more seriously. I was still enlisted at that point, but I was starting to consider actually going on to higher education and pursue that as a path. When someone who graduated from college tells you, "Hey, you should watch
," I'm like, "Okay, I'll check this out. Maybe I can glean something useful from it." I also had this concern that if this person is recommending the show to me, what if I get to college and people ask me about this show and I don't know what they're talking about? I watched the first two seasons, I didn't actually enjoy the show that much, but there were elements of that show that appealed to me. The characters, the way that they would brag about their educations. There's a scene where C.J. Cregg, the communications director, asks President Bartlet, "Why did you go to Notre Dame? You got into Harvard, Yale, and Williams, all these other fancy schools." I'm like, "Okay, these people love college." They're always talking about their educational pedigree. This guy Bartlet is literally the President of the United States, who cares where he went to college? But that's something they focused on. That was interesting to me as well, the way the characters talked and spoke. Later on, I did grow to enjoy Aaron Sorkin's movies. I loved
.
Greg: You didn't thinkThe West Wingwas very good straight off the bat. I actually want to just stay on that and dig into that for a minute.The West Wingwas beloved in my house growing up because, well, two reasons. One, my brother was very smart and wanted to be in that world. He eventually went to Oxford and did his internship in Congress, so mission accomplished. My dad used to say this thing, my grandfather died unexpectedly in 1986. I never met him. My dad always said this thing, he's like, "I could feel my dad watching the show with me." For some reason, it had this kind of... It was associated with, "This is something that I would want to show to my dad and I'm showing it to my kid. It's saying something that I think is right." You pointed out inyour New York Times articlethatThe West Wingis popular with a certain type of value holder.
: You didn't think
was very good straight off the bat. I actually want to just stay on that and dig into that for a minute.
was beloved in my house growing up because, well, two reasons. One, my brother was very smart and wanted to be in that world. He eventually went to Oxford and did his internship in Congress, so mission accomplished. My dad used to say this thing, my grandfather died unexpectedly in 1986. I never met him. My dad always said this thing, he's like, "I could feel my dad watching the show with me." For some reason, it had this kind of... It was associated with, "This is something that I would want to show to my dad and I'm showing it to my kid. It's saying something that I think is right." You pointed out in
that
is popular with a certain type of value holder.
Rob: Yeah, so when I wrote that essay in the New York Times, I pointed out that one reason why this show didn't appeal to me was because it wasn't really meant for people who didn't attend college. I watched this interview with Aaron Sorkin. He was being interviewed by David Brooks, the New York Times columnist. Aaron Sorkin said that when they screened the pilot of the show, the first season of the show, it didn't test well generally. But it got extremely good ratings from a subsection of the viewership, which were people who... There were three qualities they tended to share. One was households that earned more than $75,000 a year, households in which there was someone with a college degree, and households that subscribed to the New York Times. In the essay, I point out that those are in fact the three attributes of social class, at least as some social critics and sociologists define it. Economic capital, so households that are relatively well off, especially at that point in 1999. Educational capital, people who had at least one college degree. And then subscribed to the New York Times, which is an indicator of cultural capital. People who stay up to date on the trends, on the tastes, on the relevant sociopolitical issues of the day. Those were the people who likedThe West Wing. I was not a member of any of those categories. I grew up in low-income families. No one in my family went to college. At that point, I wasn't reading the news or staying up to date on current events. Later, my adoptive parents subscribed to the local newspaper, but we couldn't afford cable. We didn't watch any of the big political shows or anything. It just wasn't a part of the conversation the way that I grew up. It wasn't until later that I took an interest in these things, much later. In a way, I was kind of a late bloomer. These shows illuminated this path to me of the importance of education, the importance of the stepping stones toward social mobility. That was an implicit message throughout, the ways that television, especially if you're in an environment where people around you aren't that ambitious, TV shows can shape what your ambitions will be. I wrestle with this idea of did these shows tell me what to want or did they reveal to me what I wanted all along and they just showed me that the option was available?
: Yeah, so when I wrote that essay in the New York Times, I pointed out that one reason why this show didn't appeal to me was because it wasn't really meant for people who didn't attend college. I watched this interview with Aaron Sorkin. He was being interviewed by David Brooks, the New York Times columnist. Aaron Sorkin said that when they screened the pilot of the show, the first season of the show, it didn't test well generally. But it got extremely good ratings from a subsection of the viewership, which were people who... There were three qualities they tended to share. One was households that earned more than $75,000 a year, households in which there was someone with a college degree, and households that subscribed to the New York Times. In the essay, I point out that those are in fact the three attributes of social class, at least as some social critics and sociologists define it. Economic capital, so households that are relatively well off, especially at that point in 1999. Educational capital, people who had at least one college degree. And then subscribed to the New York Times, which is an indicator of cultural capital. People who stay up to date on the trends, on the tastes, on the relevant sociopolitical issues of the day. Those were the people who liked
. I was not a member of any of those categories. I grew up in low-income families. No one in my family went to college. At that point, I wasn't reading the news or staying up to date on current events. Later, my adoptive parents subscribed to the local newspaper, but we couldn't afford cable. We didn't watch any of the big political shows or anything. It just wasn't a part of the conversation the way that I grew up. It wasn't until later that I took an interest in these things, much later. In a way, I was kind of a late bloomer. These shows illuminated this path to me of the importance of education, the importance of the stepping stones toward social mobility. That was an implicit message throughout, the ways that television, especially if you're in an environment where people around you aren't that ambitious, TV shows can shape what your ambitions will be. I wrestle with this idea of did these shows tell me what to want or did they reveal to me what I wanted all along and they just showed me that the option was available?
Greg: The weird thing aboutThe West Wingis that you didn't like it, but it did show you what you wanted.
: The weird thing about
is that you didn't like it, but it did show you what you wanted.
Rob: Yeah, well, that's a good point. I stuck with it and I tried my best to understand the appeal of it. At some point, I should probably revisit the series. There was something there that I just didn't quite connect with. I'll bet now there's probably embedded subtleties and stuff that I would catch now that I wouldn't have got then. The other thing is, the show also aired on network television in the late '90s, early mid-2000s, I believe.
: Yeah, well, that's a good point. I stuck with it and I tried my best to understand the appeal of it. At some point, I should probably revisit the series. There was something there that I just didn't quite connect with. I'll bet now there's probably embedded subtleties and stuff that I would catch now that I wouldn't have got then. The other thing is, the show also aired on network television in the late '90s, early mid-2000s, I believe.
Greg:The West WingandThe Sopranosstarted in the same year.
:
and
started in the same year.
Rob: Yeah, and I do wonder ifThe West Winghad aired on HBO or something where they didn't have to follow the pacing and the formatting of a network television program, if maybe I would have responded to it more, or maybe even less. I do know what you mean, though. It had arcs between commercial breaks and stuff. Maybe I'm just not a fan of that kind of overtly political content either. I wasn't the biggest fan ofHouse of Cards. I also didn't like Sorkin's other... Was that show on HBO?
: Yeah, and I do wonder if
had aired on HBO or something where they didn't have to follow the pacing and the formatting of a network television program, if maybe I would have responded to it more, or maybe even less. I do know what you mean, though. It had arcs between commercial breaks and stuff. Maybe I'm just not a fan of that kind of overtly political content either. I wasn't the biggest fan of
. I also didn't like Sorkin's other... Was that show on HBO?
Greg:Newsroom?
:
?
Rob:Newsroom, that's right. I watched the first season, couldn't get into that either. It's funny because I like his movies, so maybe the reason why I don't like these shows that he did is because of the political content. I just don't connect with it as much.
:
, that's right. I watched the first season, couldn't get into that either. It's funny because I like his movies, so maybe the reason why I don't like these shows that he did is because of the political content. I just don't connect with it as much.
Greg: I do know what you're driving at. There's something about the Sorkin content that coalesces around the Hillary Clinton-supporting side of things. I'm not saying anything virtuous about supporting Donald Trump. What I am saying is, I think the reason I brought up Clinton was because that was the peak of liberal, well-educated, affluent America being completely tone-deaf. The peak of that was 2016 with the Hillary campaign. I think it started in some sense... I can't claim this kind of causality, butThe West Wingis an early canary in the coal mine for that. Like you said, the audience who are interested in it were those types of people. There's also something... I'm trying to rewatchThe West Wingwhen I was a bit older. There's something very sanctimonious about it. All the good guys get to make full, uninterrupted speeches where they get to be right about everything, and their opponents sit stumped while they be wrong in their villainy. There's that scene I sent to you where Josiah Bartlet lays into a Republican radio personality for thinking homosexuality is an abomination and just reels things off like an expert genius while she just sits there fuming about how wrong she is. All the dialogue is perfect for all the heroes. Fans of the show will point out that there are strong Republican characters and stuff like that, but it can be quite sanctimonious. It's quite transparent about what it thinks is right and wrong and where right and wrong lives politically. It directs you with the music and the cameras and the lighting. It feels to some extent, as I'm thinking about the episodes that I watched, there's a manipulative component. It's almost alarming how obvious they are about it. The fact that the protagonists are the Democratic Party.
: I do know what you're driving at. There's something about the Sorkin content that coalesces around the Hillary Clinton-supporting side of things. I'm not saying anything virtuous about supporting Donald Trump. What I am saying is, I think the reason I brought up Clinton was because that was the peak of liberal, well-educated, affluent America being completely tone-deaf. The peak of that was 2016 with the Hillary campaign. I think it started in some sense... I can't claim this kind of causality, but
is an early canary in the coal mine for that. Like you said, the audience who are interested in it were those types of people. There's also something... I'm trying to rewatch
when I was a bit older. There's something very sanctimonious about it. All the good guys get to make full, uninterrupted speeches where they get to be right about everything, and their opponents sit stumped while they be wrong in their villainy. There's that scene I sent to you where Josiah Bartlet lays into a Republican radio personality for thinking homosexuality is an abomination and just reels things off like an expert genius while she just sits there fuming about how wrong she is. All the dialogue is perfect for all the heroes. Fans of the show will point out that there are strong Republican characters and stuff like that, but it can be quite sanctimonious. It's quite transparent about what it thinks is right and wrong and where right and wrong lives politically. It directs you with the music and the cameras and the lighting. It feels to some extent, as I'm thinking about the episodes that I watched, there's a manipulative component. It's almost alarming how obvious they are about it. The fact that the protagonists are the Democratic Party.
Rob: Yeah, and you're right, there were some Republican characters that were portrayed well, but by and large, it had a worldview. It seemed designed to comfort those highly educated, well-to-do viewers, which is fine. I would guess there was probably a lot of overlap betweenWest Wingfans andMad Menfans. Highly educated, higher income, and so forth. ButMad Men, there was a subtlety to it that I appreciated. There was a depth to the characters. Of course, they were different eras.Mad Menwas post-Sopranos, into the realm of prestige TV where you could have anti-heroes and complex characters. WhereasWest Wingwas still in that era of good guys and bad guys. Maybe that's just where my tastes tend to drift, the complexities and the anti-heroes. Again, I'm a fan of Sorkins movies. I enjoyed theSteve Jobsbiopic,Molly's Game,Moneyball. These are all great movies. Sorkin adaptedTo Kill a Mockingbird, which I saw performed live in London, and I thought that was excellent.
: Yeah, and you're right, there were some Republican characters that were portrayed well, but by and large, it had a worldview. It seemed designed to comfort those highly educated, well-to-do viewers, which is fine. I would guess there was probably a lot of overlap between
fans and
fans. Highly educated, higher income, and so forth. But
, there was a subtlety to it that I appreciated. There was a depth to the characters. Of course, they were different eras.
was post-
, into the realm of prestige TV where you could have anti-heroes and complex characters. Whereas
was still in that era of good guys and bad guys. Maybe that's just where my tastes tend to drift, the complexities and the anti-heroes. Again, I'm a fan of Sorkins movies. I enjoyed the
biopic,
,
. These are all great movies. Sorkin adapted
, which I saw performed live in London, and I thought that was excellent.
Greg:To Kill a Mockingbird, I don't know when that was written. I suspect it was going against the grain somewhat because it's about a lawyer representing an African-American defendant, isn't it?
:
, I don't know when that was written. I suspect it was going against the grain somewhat because it's about a lawyer representing an African-American defendant, isn't it?
Rob: The criticism ofTo Kill a Mockingbirdis the white savior trope. It's promoting this view of needing this white guy to come and swoop in and save you. I thought the play was well done. It was well written and entertaining. I remember reading it in class. Of course, any book from that era, if you try to read it to a 15-year-old, they're just not going to absorb it. This time around, watching it acted out, it was very well done. You could tell Aaron Sorkin had adapted it. The fast-paced, rapid-fire dialogue, the witty back-and-forth repartee was all well done.
: The criticism of
is the white savior trope. It's promoting this view of needing this white guy to come and swoop in and save you. I thought the play was well done. It was well written and entertaining. I remember reading it in class. Of course, any book from that era, if you try to read it to a 15-year-old, they're just not going to absorb it. This time around, watching it acted out, it was very well done. You could tell Aaron Sorkin had adapted it. The fast-paced, rapid-fire dialogue, the witty back-and-forth repartee was all well done.
Greg: Thanks for another great chat. Let's do this again sometime soon.
: Thanks for another great chat. Let's do this again sometime soon.
Rob: Sounds great. Thanks, Greg.
: Sounds great. Thanks, Greg.

Comments
Restacks
L. Scott Urban
L. Scott Urban
Consistently Inconsistent
Consistently Inconsistent
Consistently Inconsistent
Jul 26
I'll have to disagree on To Kill a Mockingbird.  Almost everything that play does well is straight from the book, and everything it does poorly is altered.  Usually in a way that directly contradicts the book's overall message and character.  Sorkin's high moralizing style just does not mesh well with a book that heavily prioritizes meeting people where they are.
I'll have to disagree on To Kill a Mockingbird.  Almost everything that play does well is straight from the book, and everything it does poorly is altered.  Usually in a way that directly contradicts the book's overall message and character.  Sorkin's high moralizing style just does not mesh well with a book that heavily prioritizes meeting people where they are.
Sorkin seems to be fine with Atticus when he's putting down a rabid dog, but can't abide the thought that he would ever feel troubled in doing so, or try to find a better way forward.  He misses the soul of the book, and the adaptation really suffers for it.
Sorkin seems to be fine with Atticus when he's putting down a rabid dog, but can't abide the thought that he would ever feel troubled in doing so, or try to find a better way forward.  He misses the soul of the book, and the adaptation really suffers for it.
Like
Reply
Share
Nick
Nick
Nicks Newsletter
Nicks Newsletter
Nicks Newsletter
Jul 25
Edited
> I had just read this study about how sexual content is inversely correlated with box office sales in movies. Essentially, the more sexual content that is in a movie, the fewer tickets those movies tend to sell. But interestingly, sexual content predicts the likelihood of winning an Oscar. Sexual content doesn't really appeal to the masses, it seems, but it does appeal to critics and taste-makers.
> I had just read this study about how sexual content is inversely correlated with box office sales in movies. Essentially, the more sexual content that is in a movie, the fewer tickets those movies tend to sell. But interestingly, sexual content predicts the likelihood of winning an Oscar. Sexual content doesn't really appeal to the masses, it seems, but it does appeal to critics and taste-makers.
Is that more like a side-effect? As in, more sex means you can't have the appropriate rating, missing a lot of sales. And you also don't get the family man node of approval, so families aren't going to watch your movie, like they would with a safer movie focusing on good old violence and special effects.
Is that more like a side-effect? As in, more sex means you can't have the appropriate rating, missing a lot of sales. And you also don't get the family man node of approval, so families aren't going to watch your movie, like they would with a safer movie focusing on good old violence and special effects.
That, plus the readily availability, since 1996 or so, of internet porn (which made sex/nudity in movies redundant as a draw).
That, plus the readily availability, since 1996 or so, of internet porn (which made sex/nudity in movies redundant as a draw).
I'd say in the 70s and 80s and early 90s sex/nudity absolutely sold in movies, especially if the sexual imagery was disconnected from adult plot themes and arthouse sensibilities (which would of course alienate the maistream audiences). So, a movie like Basic Instinct, or teen comedies, could very well use sex (showing tits and ass at least), and it would drive their box office sales.
I'd say in the 70s and 80s and early 90s sex/nudity absolutely sold in movies, especially if the sexual imagery was disconnected from adult plot themes and arthouse sensibilities (which would of course alienate the maistream audiences). So, a movie like Basic Instinct, or teen comedies, could very well use sex (showing tits and ass at least), and it would drive their box office sales.
On the other hand, a movie what wanted the widest PG rating on the other hand, and was aiming for 4th of July blockbuster status, couldn't risk it. So the success of those would "prove" that "sex doesn't sell", but only because they weren't given the option to have sex/nudity for rating concerns.
On the other hand, a movie what wanted the widest PG rating on the other hand, and was aiming for 4th of July blockbuster status, couldn't risk it. So the success of those would "prove" that "sex doesn't sell", but only because they weren't given the option to have sex/nudity for rating concerns.
Like
Reply
Share
Top
Latest
Discussions

Rob Henderson

Rob Henderson

Rob Henderson

Rob Henderson

Rob Henderson

Rob Henderson

Rob Henderson

Rob Henderson

Rob Henderson

Rob Henderson


undefined subscriptions will be displayed on your profile (edit)
Skip for now
For your security, we need to re-authenticate you.
Click the link we sent to sasha.p.podolsky@gmail.com, orclick here to sign in.
Info
Shopping








0:00/3:00

0:00
/
3:00



Info
Shopping








0:00/4:32

0:00
/
4:32


