

1
Book meeting
Book a meeting
To mark the Fourth of July, I figured Id re-post this uncut version of a personal essay, along with the transcript of the speech I gave at my sisters recent wedding.
My earliest memory was before foster care. I was with my mom.It was completely dark. I was gripping my mothers lap. Burying my face so deeply into her stomach I couldnt breathe. I came up for air and saw two police officers looming over us. I knew they wanted to take my mom away, but I was scared and didnt want to let her go. I fastened myself to her as hard as I could.In the next part of the memory, Im in a long white hallway with my mother. Im sitting on a bench next to her drinking chocolate milk. My three-year-old legs dangled above the floor. I sneezed and spilled my chocolate milk. I looked to my mom for help, but she couldnt move her arms. She was wearing handcuffs. I made a mess, and my mom couldnt do anything. I started crying.Documents from my social worker revealed that my mother was a drug addict and that she didnt know who my father was. At three years old, I learned my mom was unable to take care of me.I entered the Los Angeles County foster care system.
My earliest memory was before foster care. I was with my mom.
It was completely dark. I was gripping my mothers lap. Burying my face so deeply into her stomach I couldnt breathe. I came up for air and saw two police officers looming over us. I knew they wanted to take my mom away, but I was scared and didnt want to let her go. I fastened myself to her as hard as I could.
In the next part of the memory, Im in a long white hallway with my mother. Im sitting on a bench next to her drinking chocolate milk. My three-year-old legs dangled above the floor. I sneezed and spilled my chocolate milk. I looked to my mom for help, but she couldnt move her arms. She was wearing handcuffs. I made a mess, and my mom couldnt do anything. I started crying.
Documents from my social worker revealed that my mother was a drug addict and that she didnt know who my father was. At three years old, I learned my mom was unable to take care of me.
I entered the Los Angeles County foster care system.
After my mothers arrest, there was a blur of different adults buzzing around me. My body vibrated in my car-seat as the social worker drove. I fell asleep, and woke up in a foster home.I dont recall much about my first foster home, but I remember how I left. I was playing with the other kids, under a table pretending to be a dinosaur.Suddenly, an adult entered.I peered out from under the table. A woman kneeled down and said it was time for me to go. I recognized her as my social worker. Instinctively, I knew she was taking me somewhere else and I would not return. I suspected this arrangement was not meant to last. Id seen several of my foster siblings come and go. I knew I was next.The woman repeated that it was time to leave. I gripped one of the table legs, refusing to let go. I would not let go of this leg. For me, this stood as a representation of the entire home.I went through these separations six more times, living in seven foster homes in total.Each time it got a little easier. Eventually, when I would relocate to a new home, I stopped feeling anything at all. I learned how to get along with different families and foster siblings. In each home, my older foster siblings taught me new skills. One was how to steal purses and pick pockets. As a small child, I was dumbfounded at how easy it was to steal from adults. Being less than half their height helped. Grownups dont pay much attention to whats going on down there.One day when I was nearly eight years old, Mrs. Martinez, my seventh and final foster mother, showed me a video. On the screen there was a man, a woman and a little girl. They all said, Hi Robert! which startled me. Id suddenly wondered whether the people on TV also watched us. This seemed to be proof that it was true. The man bounced a beach ball on the little girls head while the woman gave a tour of their home. They seemed very kind. I hoped they could see through the TV how much I enjoyed watching them.Mrs. Martinez turned to me, These people want to adopt you.When I entered my new parents home, my new sister showed me some of her toys. In the foster homes, I had never had my own toys. I was in awe when she showed me a yo-yo that lit up. She said I could have it. Then gave me some of her other toys. This act of kindness from my four-year-old sister is etched so deep into my memory that I would do anything for her today.Two years after I was adopted, my parents got divorced. My mom got full custody of me after some dispute between her and my adoptive father. He was angry at my mom for leaving him, severed ties with me because he knew it would hurt my mom. Id lost contact with caregivers before, but I thought those experiences were behind me. I was heartbroken.
After my mothers arrest, there was a blur of different adults buzzing around me. My body vibrated in my car-seat as the social worker drove. I fell asleep, and woke up in a foster home.
I dont recall much about my first foster home, but I remember how I left. I was playing with the other kids, under a table pretending to be a dinosaur.
Suddenly, an adult entered.
I peered out from under the table. A woman kneeled down and said it was time for me to go. I recognized her as my social worker. Instinctively, I knew she was taking me somewhere else and I would not return. I suspected this arrangement was not meant to last. Id seen several of my foster siblings come and go. I knew I was next.
The woman repeated that it was time to leave. I gripped one of the table legs, refusing to let go. I would not let go of this leg. For me, this stood as a representation of the entire home.
I went through these separations six more times, living in seven foster homes in total.
Each time it got a little easier. Eventually, when I would relocate to a new home, I stopped feeling anything at all. I learned how to get along with different families and foster siblings. In each home, my older foster siblings taught me new skills. One was how to steal purses and pick pockets. As a small child, I was dumbfounded at how easy it was to steal from adults. Being less than half their height helped. Grownups dont pay much attention to whats going on down there.
One day when I was nearly eight years old, Mrs. Martinez, my seventh and final foster mother, showed me a video. On the screen there was a man, a woman and a little girl. They all said, Hi Robert! which startled me. Id suddenly wondered whether the people on TV also watched us. This seemed to be proof that it was true. The man bounced a beach ball on the little girls head while the woman gave a tour of their home. They seemed very kind. I hoped they could see through the TV how much I enjoyed watching them.
Mrs. Martinez turned to me, These people want to adopt you.
When I entered my new parents home, my new sister showed me some of her toys. In the foster homes, I had never had my own toys. I was in awe when she showed me a yo-yo that lit up. She said I could have it. Then gave me some of her other toys. This act of kindness from my four-year-old sister is etched so deep into my memory that I would do anything for her today.
Two years after I was adopted, my parents got divorced. My mom got full custody of me after some dispute between her and my adoptive father. He was angry at my mom for leaving him, severed ties with me because he knew it would hurt my mom. Id lost contact with caregivers before, but I thought those experiences were behind me. I was heartbroken.
By age 10, I felt like a burnout. I found ways of getting into trouble instead of doing my classwork. All of the chaos and drama in my life had instilled in me a contempt for adults and anything school-related. As far as I was concerned, adults were unreliable liars.My mom learned I wasnt doing my class work from my teacher, who showed her a large stack of uncompleted assignments. Later that day, my mom dumped the assignments on my bed and walked out. Outraged, I took the papers, walked outside, and threw everything into the garbage pail.I kept walking, deciding to visit my friend Edgar. To me, he was practically an adult at 12 years old, having been held back in school. He and his brother lived with his mom, who raised them alone. Edgar had gotten into trouble before for stealing cars. Later in high school, his younger brother would be murdered in a gang initiation ritual.I knocked on Edgars door.Whats up man.Yo. He was flicking a lighter and pulled out a joint. I have one left.We walked to a field and smoked the joint. On the ground near some bushes, I saw a pack of Camels.Probably empty, I said, picking it up. It was full.We smoked the joint and as many cigarettes as we could until we started feeling sick. I told Edgar about my mom discovering my unfinished assignments.Dude, I told him, she said I had to do all of it.So what are you going to do? he asked.I threw it all in the trash. We high-fived and laughed.Buzzed from the weed and nicotine, we walked to our friend Bethanys house. I rang the doorbell.Dude, look, Edgar was snickering, flicking his lighter on the 8-foot thicket by the porch. Pine needles crackled as he held the flame under them.I suppressed a grin. Are you retarded? Bethanys mom is going to seeSuddenly the door opened. It was Bethanys mom. I glanced next to me, relieved to see Edgar with his hands in his pockets.Hi, um, is Bethany here? I asked.Shes staying at her dads today, boys... she said, then stopped and shrieked: OH MY GOD!The entire thicket was on fire. The flame was spreading fast.Bethanys mom pointed us to the water hose, while she called the fire department. They arrived quickly. Fortunately, no one was hurt, and the only damage was to the shrubbery.A firefighter took Edgar and me aside. We insisted we didnt start the fire. He didnt believe us, but didnt call our parents either.If we find you boys near any more fires, he said firmly, were going to contact your parents.I ran home. My stomachache was intense. I opened the garbage pail in front of my house and puked all over my unfinished homework.
By age 10, I felt like a burnout. I found ways of getting into trouble instead of doing my classwork. All of the chaos and drama in my life had instilled in me a contempt for adults and anything school-related. As far as I was concerned, adults were unreliable liars.
My mom learned I wasnt doing my class work from my teacher, who showed her a large stack of uncompleted assignments. Later that day, my mom dumped the assignments on my bed and walked out. Outraged, I took the papers, walked outside, and threw everything into the garbage pail.
I kept walking, deciding to visit my friend Edgar. To me, he was practically an adult at 12 years old, having been held back in school. He and his brother lived with his mom, who raised them alone. Edgar had gotten into trouble before for stealing cars. Later in high school, his younger brother would be murdered in a gang initiation ritual.
I knocked on Edgars door.
Whats up man.
Yo. He was flicking a lighter and pulled out a joint. I have one left.
We walked to a field and smoked the joint. On the ground near some bushes, I saw a pack of Camels.
Probably empty, I said, picking it up. It was full.
We smoked the joint and as many cigarettes as we could until we started feeling sick. I told Edgar about my mom discovering my unfinished assignments.
Dude, I told him, she said I had to do all of it.
So what are you going to do? he asked.
I threw it all in the trash. We high-fived and laughed.
Buzzed from the weed and nicotine, we walked to our friend Bethanys house. I rang the doorbell.
Dude, look, Edgar was snickering, flicking his lighter on the 8-foot thicket by the porch. Pine needles crackled as he held the flame under them.
I suppressed a grin. Are you retarded? Bethanys mom is going to see
Suddenly the door opened. It was Bethanys mom. I glanced next to me, relieved to see Edgar with his hands in his pockets.
Hi, um, is Bethany here? I asked.
Shes staying at her dads today, boys... she said, then stopped and shrieked: OH MY GOD!
The entire thicket was on fire. The flame was spreading fast.
Bethanys mom pointed us to the water hose, while she called the fire department. They arrived quickly. Fortunately, no one was hurt, and the only damage was to the shrubbery.
A firefighter took Edgar and me aside. We insisted we didnt start the fire. He didnt believe us, but didnt call our parents either.
If we find you boys near any more fires, he said firmly, were going to contact your parents.
I ran home. My stomachache was intense. I opened the garbage pail in front of my house and puked all over my unfinished homework.
Throughout these experiences with drugs and fires, and later vandalism and fist fights, my mom took me aside one day. She told me she had fallen in love with a woman named Shelly. At first, I was confused. But Shelly was kind to me. I felt comfortable talking with her about things I couldnt talk to my mom about. Together, she and my mom raised me and my sister into adolescence.Shelly was shot when I was 14.I was terrified that she wouldnt survive. Other parental figures rejected me, yet Shelly chose to help care for me. She survived after extensive surgery and received an insurance settlement which she and my mother used to buy a home. But, one year later, our home was foreclosed. I was sixteen, and decided I had to get out there.During my senior year in high school, my teachers, coaches, and other adults urged me to go to community college. I was adamant that I was not college material. Though I was not aware of it at the time, National Foster Youth Institute found that less than 3 percent of former foster kids graduated from college. Another study led by Amy Dworsky at Chapin Hall, a policy research center at the University of Chicago, found that 60 percent of boys who grow up in foster care later become involved in the criminal justice system. By age seventeen, more than half are arrested.I graduated in the bottom-third of my high school class with a 2.2 GPA  not exactly college material. I never took the SAT and tried to do as little as possible. My goal for every class was to get a C-minus; just enough to avoid getting lectured at. I read ahead in the textbooks and found the material interesting, but despised the expectations of adults to do well in school. I figured that if adults thought something was good, it was probably stupid.Some adults suggested I join the military. I figured it was probably my best exit plan. The structure of the armed forces appealed to me, and I noticed that people spoke of the military with reverence.Planning to join the Air Force was the smartest thing I had done at that point.But I wasnt smart about how I went about it. The night before I took the ASVAB, the exam required to join the military, I stayed up most of the night playing Xbox and drinking Four Loko with my friends.Two weeks later, my military recruiter pulled up my exam results.This is a great score, you qualify for every job, he said.He pulled up some more charts, showing how my results could be converted into SAT scores. I noticed that my SAT score, according to the charts, would have been the same as my straight-A classmate who was heading off to college.School sucks anyway, I thought.
Throughout these experiences with drugs and fires, and later vandalism and fist fights, my mom took me aside one day. She told me she had fallen in love with a woman named Shelly. At first, I was confused. But Shelly was kind to me. I felt comfortable talking with her about things I couldnt talk to my mom about. Together, she and my mom raised me and my sister into adolescence.
Shelly was shot when I was 14.

I was terrified that she wouldnt survive. Other parental figures rejected me, yet Shelly chose to help care for me. She survived after extensive surgery and received an insurance settlement which she and my mother used to buy a home. But, one year later, our home was foreclosed. I was sixteen, and decided I had to get out there.
During my senior year in high school, my teachers, coaches, and other adults urged me to go to community college. I was adamant that I was not college material. Though I was not aware of it at the time, National Foster Youth Institute found that less than 3 percent of former foster kids graduated from college. Another study led by Amy Dworsky at Chapin Hall, a policy research center at the University of Chicago, found that 60 percent of boys who grow up in foster care later become involved in the criminal justice system. By age seventeen, more than half are arrested.
I graduated in the bottom-third of my high school class with a 2.2 GPA  not exactly college material. I never took the SAT and tried to do as little as possible. My goal for every class was to get a C-minus; just enough to avoid getting lectured at. I read ahead in the textbooks and found the material interesting, but despised the expectations of adults to do well in school. I figured that if adults thought something was good, it was probably stupid.
Some adults suggested I join the military. I figured it was probably my best exit plan. The structure of the armed forces appealed to me, and I noticed that people spoke of the military with reverence.
Planning to join the Air Force was the smartest thing I had done at that point.
But I wasnt smart about how I went about it. The night before I took the ASVAB, the exam required to join the military, I stayed up most of the night playing Xbox and drinking Four Loko with my friends.
Two weeks later, my military recruiter pulled up my exam results.
This is a great score, you qualify for every job, he said.
He pulled up some more charts, showing how my results could be converted into SAT scores. I noticed that my SAT score, according to the charts, would have been the same as my straight-A classmate who was heading off to college.
, I thought.
I spoke with some other veterans before enlisting. All the Air Force guys said, You know, join the Air Force. And then I would talk to some Marines and some soldiers, and theyd say, Yeah, if I could go back, I probably would have joined the Air Force. Its less intense, less physically demanding. And as soon as I stepped off the bus at Lackland Air Force Base in Texas for basic training, the first thing the instructors shouted at us was, This isnt the fucking Chair Force.
I had no idea that they had recently revamped the entire training program because we were in two warsthere was Iraq and Afghanistan. This was only six years after 9/11. George Bush was still the president, and the Air Force was trying, and probably failing, to make us as tough as the members of the Marines and the Army. As soon as we got off the bus, it was more intense than I expected. But it turned out to be the environment I needed. Most of the military isnt basic training, fortunately, but it continues to provide a rigid structure for junior enlisted personnel.
On day one of basic military training an instructor announced, There are only two reasons you dont meet our standards: Either you dont know what is expected of you, or you dont care to do it.They made sure we knew what was expected, and the consequences of failing to adhere to standards. Rigid military constraints kept me out of trouble and the burden of high expectations helped me to realize my potential.There was a sense of camaraderie that gave me a new way to relate to my peers unlike the troublemaking Id gotten into with friends back home. The military directs the impulses of young people, especially young men, into more productive pursuits. I met people from around the world, some who had tougher lives than mine, and bonded with them. Perhaps most importantly, I learned that reliable adults existed. I tried to make myself into one of them.During my final deployment, my supervisor and I talked about the GI Bill, a veterans education benefit that pays for college tuition.The military asks a lot of us, he observed. Remember that they offer a lot, too. I decided to commit to going to college, somehow, even with my poor high school transcript.
On day one of basic military training an instructor announced, There are only two reasons you dont meet our standards: Either you dont know what is expected of you, or you dont care to do it.
They made sure we knew what was expected, and the consequences of failing to adhere to standards. Rigid military constraints kept me out of trouble and the burden of high expectations helped me to realize my potential.
There was a sense of camaraderie that gave me a new way to relate to my peers unlike the troublemaking Id gotten into with friends back home. The military directs the impulses of young people, especially young men, into more productive pursuits. I met people from around the world, some who had tougher lives than mine, and bonded with them. Perhaps most importantly, I learned that reliable adults existed. I tried to make myself into one of them.
During my final deployment, my supervisor and I talked about the GI Bill, a veterans education benefit that pays for college tuition.
The military asks a lot of us, he observed. Remember that they offer a lot, too. I decided to commit to going to college, somehow, even with my poor high school transcript.
With a year left on my enlistment contract, when I was twenty-four years old, I went to a different kind of boot camp. After researching online, I learned about the Warrior-Scholar Project, an academic boot camp designed to teach veterans how to be college students.After completing the two-week program, I made a plan. I decided to take night classes, and, once discharged from the military, I hoped to transfer to a leading university.I signed up to take the SAT. The day before the test, I was nervous. After working a 12-hour shift on base, I went straight home, making sure to get a full nights sleep.I submitted my test results along with my college applications. My propensity for risk-taking had not completely subsided: I applied only to colleges where my odds of admission were low. By that point, though, I figured Id be okay, college or no. Writing my applications, I realized how lucky I was. I felt grateful, despite everything. For my adoptive family, for my sister, for the opportunity to serve, for being born in a country where I had a second chance to be the first in my family to go to college.
With a year left on my enlistment contract, when I was twenty-four years old, I went to a different kind of boot camp. After researching online, I learned about the Warrior-Scholar Project, an academic boot camp designed to teach veterans how to be college students.
After completing the two-week program, I made a plan. I decided to take night classes, and, once discharged from the military, I hoped to transfer to a leading university.
I signed up to take the SAT. The day before the test, I was nervous. After working a 12-hour shift on base, I went straight home, making sure to get a full nights sleep.
I submitted my test results along with my college applications. My propensity for risk-taking had not completely subsided: I applied only to colleges where my odds of admission were low. By that point, though, I figured Id be okay, college or no. Writing my applications, I realized how lucky I was. I felt grateful, despite everything. For my adoptive family, for my sister, for the opportunity to serve, for being born in a country where I had a second chance to be the first in my family to go to college.
After I sent off applications, I joined my a friend of mine named Eric for lunch. He was a hard-partying PhD student from the Netherlands Id met at a bar a couple of years prior. After I saw him fight a bouncer at a nightclub, we became friends.
So thats my plan, I guess. I explained to Eric that I planned to leave the military and go to college.
If you succeed, that would really be something, Eric replied.
You went to a good college. Its not that special, I said. I wanted to downplay the daunting obstacle ahead of me.
Look, dude, Eric, who had attended the University of Chicago continued, I was expected to go to university. My parents are academicsit would have been a shock if I hadnt gone to grad school. Theyre disappointed in me for taking so long.
Yeah okay, I said. The expectations for us were probably different.
Not probably. I dont mean to sound like a dick, but statistically, youre not supposed to go to college. If you get into Yale or wherever, your story would be so American. The good and bad stereotypes of your country would be confirmed, Eric mused, referring to both my dysfunctional upbringing and the possibility of where I might study.
Months later, I opened an email from Yale admissions. I nearly fell out of my chair when I read the first word: Congratulations!After re-reading the admissions letter a few more times to make sure it was real, I called my mom. She was extremely proud, and together we joked about how glad we were that the GI Bill would cover the tuition fees.At first, I loved Yale. It was like being on another planet. There was a dreamlike feeling to the campus when I would walk around. I got along relatively well with other students, despite differing backgrounds. They were curious about my military background, and I was curious what life was like for bright students who had been groomed their entire lives to attend a place like Yale. Mutual curiosity fueled friendships.Eight weeks into my first semester, I was introduced to the new social movement on college campuses. Student protestors had united to harass a faculty member for writing an email in support of free expression. They called her racist and demanded she and her husband be fired. This was, to me, absurd. I felt like an alien, because I had no understanding of the social justice lexicon or how students selectively deployed their ideology to take down their chosen targets. I had just left the military, and suddenly I was watching the children of millionaires say they felt unsafe at the second richest university in the world.I was fascinated by this. I tried to learn everything I could about the social dynamics of elite universities. From observing student protestors, and having many conversations, I developed my idea ofluxury beliefs.A Yale graduate named Michael Jacobs described Yale as Disneyland for brainiacs. J.D. Vance, who graduated from Yale Law School, called it Hollywood for nerds. I cant do better than these descriptions. I read a lot, enjoyed my classes, and gave every assignment my best effort. I volunteered as a part-time tutor at New Haven Reads, helping kids from low-income families with their reading and writing skills. Some of them were foster kids, and we connected over our shared backgrounds.I also worked as a psychology research assistant at Yale, and, later, as a summer research assistant at Stanford. There, I worked at a nursery school, helping with research on developmental psychology in young children. The kids at this school come from very affluent families. Working with them, I wondered how my life might have been different if Id gone to that kind of preschool.I enjoyed psychology research and applied for a Gates Cambridge scholarship to study as a PhD student in psychology at the University of Cambridge. In 2018, in yet another surreal moment, I opened my email and saw that I had been admitted to the program.Reflecting on all of this, I know I have been extremely lucky. It is not the kind of luck anyone should rely on. If you replayed the circumstances of my early life repeatedly, nine times out of ten I suspect Id end up in jail like my two best friends in high school. One of them was raised by his grandmother and never met his mom. The other was raised by his mom and his dad was a deadbeat alcoholic.Educated people ask how we can get more underprivileged kids into college. That is a laudable goal. But education is a red herring. For many kids, having the kind of childhood I had takes a toll in ways a college diploma cant fix. Furthermore, it may not be realistic for every kid to go to college. But it might be realistic for more kids to have stable homes with reliable parents. That would require asking adults to be more responsible, and prioritizing the well-being of children, something our elites are reluctant to do. As Yale professor Nicholas Christakis has written, almost every innovation in child welfare in the United States, including orphanages and subsidized child care, has been driven primarily by adult concerns. Of secondary importance were convictions about what was best for children.That affluent people focus so much on education and less on family reveals something about them: They derive their sense of self-worth from their credentials and take their families for granted. As someone who never really had one, maybe I am the least qualified person to talk about the importance of family. But as someone with more education than I expected, maybe I am more qualified to say we give education more importance than we should.We can try to get more foster kids to go to college. As a starting point, we can try to keep them out of jail. That starts at home.
Months later, I opened an email from Yale admissions. I nearly fell out of my chair when I read the first word: Congratulations!

After re-reading the admissions letter a few more times to make sure it was real, I called my mom. She was extremely proud, and together we joked about how glad we were that the GI Bill would cover the tuition fees.

At first, I loved Yale. It was like being on another planet. There was a dreamlike feeling to the campus when I would walk around. I got along relatively well with other students, despite differing backgrounds. They were curious about my military background, and I was curious what life was like for bright students who had been groomed their entire lives to attend a place like Yale. Mutual curiosity fueled friendships.

Eight weeks into my first semester, I was introduced to the new social movement on college campuses. Student protestors had united to harass a faculty member for writing an email in support of free expression. They called her racist and demanded she and her husband be fired. This was, to me, absurd. I felt like an alien, because I had no understanding of the social justice lexicon or how students selectively deployed their ideology to take down their chosen targets. I had just left the military, and suddenly I was watching the children of millionaires say they felt unsafe at the second richest university in the world.

I was fascinated by this. I tried to learn everything I could about the social dynamics of elite universities. From observing student protestors, and having many conversations, I developed my idea ofluxury beliefs.

A Yale graduate named Michael Jacobs described Yale as Disneyland for brainiacs. J.D. Vance, who graduated from Yale Law School, called it Hollywood for nerds. I cant do better than these descriptions. I read a lot, enjoyed my classes, and gave every assignment my best effort. I volunteered as a part-time tutor at New Haven Reads, helping kids from low-income families with their reading and writing skills. Some of them were foster kids, and we connected over our shared backgrounds.

I also worked as a psychology research assistant at Yale, and, later, as a summer research assistant at Stanford. There, I worked at a nursery school, helping with research on developmental psychology in young children. The kids at this school come from very affluent families. Working with them, I wondered how my life might have been different if Id gone to that kind of preschool.

I enjoyed psychology research and applied for a Gates Cambridge scholarship to study as a PhD student in psychology at the University of Cambridge. In 2018, in yet another surreal moment, I opened my email and saw that I had been admitted to the program.

Reflecting on all of this, I know I have been extremely lucky. It is not the kind of luck anyone should rely on. If you replayed the circumstances of my early life repeatedly, nine times out of ten I suspect Id end up in jail like my two best friends in high school. One of them was raised by his grandmother and never met his mom. The other was raised by his mom and his dad was a deadbeat alcoholic.

Educated people ask how we can get more underprivileged kids into college. That is a laudable goal. But education is a red herring. For many kids, having the kind of childhood I had takes a toll in ways a college diploma cant fix. Furthermore, it may not be realistic for every kid to go to college. But it might be realistic for more kids to have stable homes with reliable parents. That would require asking adults to be more responsible, and prioritizing the well-being of children, something our elites are reluctant to do. As Yale professor Nicholas Christakis has written, almost every innovation in child welfare in the United States, including orphanages and subsidized child care, has been driven primarily by adult concerns. Of secondary importance were convictions about what was best for children.

That affluent people focus so much on education and less on family reveals something about them: They derive their sense of self-worth from their credentials and take their families for granted. As someone who never really had one, maybe I am the least qualified person to talk about the importance of family. But as someone with more education than I expected, maybe I am more qualified to say we give education more importance than we should.

We can try to get more foster kids to go to college. As a starting point, we can try to keep them out of jail. That starts at home.
Here is a photo from a few months ago of my sister and me. At her wedding in Chico, California.
She asked me to give a brief wedding speech:
A lot of people, especially people without siblings, will say that they wished theyd had an older brother. I dont think Ive ever heard anyone say they wished theyd had a little sister.The reason people want older brothers is probably because they think theyd learn something from them, maybe some practical advice, maybe some wisdom.My strong suspicion, though, is that Ive probably learned more from Hannah than she has from me.The first time I met her, after living in a whirlwind of foster homes, the first thing she did was give me a bunch of toys. The next thing she did was show me her piggie bank, and explained that she would share half the profits with me.She was just four years old, yet within the first day of meeting her, Hannah had shown herself to be the most generous kid, probably the most generous person, Id ever met. She taught me, not through words, but through her example, the power of kindness.Im still learning from her. A few weeks ago she told me that forgiveness is a verb. Again, its not just something you say, but something you practice through conscious decisions and actions.She was probably a better example for me than I was for her.Ive sifted through my memory for instances where I taught her anything of equal importance and Im more than a little embarrassed to admit I keep coming up short.And so Im thankful that with her new husband, she has found someone who is worthy of her.
A lot of people, especially people without siblings, will say that they wished theyd had an older brother. I dont think Ive ever heard anyone say they wished theyd had a little sister.
The reason people want older brothers is probably because they think theyd learn something from them, maybe some practical advice, maybe some wisdom.
My strong suspicion, though, is that Ive probably learned more from Hannah than she has from me.
The first time I met her, after living in a whirlwind of foster homes, the first thing she did was give me a bunch of toys. The next thing she did was show me her piggie bank, and explained that she would share half the profits with me.
She was just four years old, yet within the first day of meeting her, Hannah had shown herself to be the most generous kid, probably the most generous person, Id ever met. She taught me, not through words, but through her example, the power of kindness.
Im still learning from her. A few weeks ago she told me that forgiveness is a verb. Again, its not just something you say, but something you practice through conscious decisions and actions.
She was probably a better example for me than I was for her.
Ive sifted through my memory for instances where I taught her anything of equal importance and Im more than a little embarrassed to admit I keep coming up short.
And so Im thankful that with her new husband, she has found someone who is worthy of her.
All of these memories were fresh in my mind, having just writtenTroubled. Later that night, the wedding DJ came up to me and said, Man, Ive been doing weddings for ten years, and that was the best wedding speech Ive ever heard.
All of these memories were fresh in my mind, having just written
. Later that night, the wedding DJ came up to me and said, Man, Ive been doing weddings for ten years, and that was the best wedding speech Ive ever heard.
Comments
Restacks
Michael Mayhan
Michael Mayhan
Michael Mayhan
Michael Mayhan
Michael Mayhan
Jul 4
The wedding speech is one more reason I'm happy to subscribe.
The wedding speech is one more reason I'm happy to subscribe.
Like (10)
Reply
Share
Aarati Martino
Aarati Martino
Aarati Martino
Aarati Martino
Aarati Martino
Jul 4
Congratulations to your sister and thank you for sharing with us!  Yall are so lucky to have each other.
Congratulations to your sister and thank you for sharing with us!  Yall are so lucky to have each other.
Like (7)
Reply
Share
Top
Latest
Discussions

Rob Henderson

Rob Henderson

Rob Henderson

Rob Henderson

Rob Henderson

Rob Henderson

Rob Henderson

Rob Henderson

Rob Henderson

Rob Henderson


undefined subscriptions will be displayed on your profile (edit)
Skip for now
For your security, we need to re-authenticate you.
Click the link we sent to sasha.p.podolsky@gmail.com, orclick here to sign in.