

1
Book meeting
Book a meeting
Here is the transcript, lightly edited, with highlights ofmy conversation with Michael Maliceon his YOUR WELCOME podcast.
Here is the transcript, lightly edited, with highlights of
on his YOUR WELCOME podcast.
Michael Malice is hilarious. We get into some heavy topics, but this was hands down one of the funniest podcast conversations Ive ever had.Enjoy:
Michael Malice:Good afternoon, Michael Malice here. Guys, this is going to be a really, really intense and exciting episode. I've been waiting for this for weeks. We have with us Rob Henderson. He's one of my absolute favorite contemporary thinkers. His Substack is very big; you can follow him on Twitter at robkhenderson, which is a must.
Good afternoon, Michael Malice here. Guys, this is going to be a really, really intense and exciting episode. I've been waiting for this for weeks. We have with us Rob Henderson. He's one of my absolute favorite contemporary thinkers. His Substack is very big; you can follow him on Twitter at robkhenderson, which is a must.
Your new book,Troubled, is out this week. I'm really excited to promote it. You sent me a signed copy. I read the description of your book, and the first sentence is, "Rob Henderson was born to a drug-addicted mother and father he never met, ultimately shuttling between 10 different foster homes in California." And it's like when you hear about a kid not having that sense of stability, not having that homeit just really gets to me.
Your new book,
, is out this week. I'm really excited to promote it. You sent me a signed copy. I read the description of your book, and the first sentence is, "Rob Henderson was born to a drug-addicted mother and father he never met, ultimately shuttling between 10 different foster homes in California." And it's like when you hear about a kid not having that sense of stability, not having that homeit just really gets to me.
So first of all, I hope you appreciate how difficult reading about your upbringing has been for me, and a little bit of sympathy would go a long way.
[laughter]
Rob Henderson:I'm sorry, Michael. I'm sorry you had to go through that.
I'm sorry, Michael. I'm sorry you had to go through that.
Michael Malice:And I'm delighted that you fought for yourself, that you're like, "I'm not gonna be a statistic; I'm going to make something of myself." Can you talk a little about that?
And I'm delighted that you fought for yourself, that you're like, "I'm not gonna be a statistic; I'm going to make something of myself." Can you talk a little about that?
Rob Henderson:Thanks man. It was difficult to write the book in the first place. I didn't expect the mental scars to be so fresh as they were. Trying to dig through those memories and communicate the most striking and vivid moments of my unusual upbringing. So just very brieflywe can elaborate, you can ask questions, whateverbut in short, I was born in Los Angeles, never knew my father. My mother was severely addicted to drugs. So she and I were homeless for a while, then we movedwe lived in a car, and then we finally settled in this slum apartment.
Thanks man. It was difficult to write the book in the first place. I didn't expect the mental scars to be so fresh as they were. Trying to dig through those memories and communicate the most striking and vivid moments of my unusual upbringing. So just very brieflywe can elaborate, you can ask questions, whateverbut in short, I was born in Los Angeles, never knew my father. My mother was severely addicted to drugs. So she and I were homeless for a while, then we movedwe lived in a car, and then we finally settled in this slum apartment.
**
Michael Malice:Let me interject here. When you are so vulnerable and you tell about this upbringing, how do people react, and how do you want them to react? Because I'm sure on some level you don't want to be treated like a wounded bird.
Let me interject here. When you are so vulnerable and you tell about this upbringing, how do people react, and how do you want them to react? Because I'm sure on some level you don't want to be treated like a wounded bird.
Rob Henderson:It's a good question. When I was growing up in California, I hung out with some troublemaking guys and drug dealers and kids who aspired to join gangs and so on. In that environment, it would have been a huge mistake to wear your heart on your sleeve and talk about, "Oh, my poor childhood," and all this stuff. I'm describing these events of my life to you in a matter-of-fact wayI'm communicating my experiences. But at that time, as a kid, it would have been a real mistake to be vulnerable in the environment, because it would not have attracted pity; it would have attracted predation. And so to be in a position to speak about these things now is a kind of luxury.
It's a good question. When I was growing up in California, I hung out with some troublemaking guys and drug dealers and kids who aspired to join gangs and so on. In that environment, it would have been a huge mistake to wear your heart on your sleeve and talk about, "Oh, my poor childhood," and all this stuff. I'm describing these events of my life to you in a matter-of-fact wayI'm communicating my experiences. But at that time, as a kid, it would have been a real mistake to be vulnerable in the environment, because it would not have attracted pity; it would have attracted predation. And so to be in a position to speak about these things now is a kind of luxury.
By the time I arrived at Yale, I noticed that people who had lived the safest, most secure, sheltered lives in the history of humanity, were eager to talk about how victimized and marginalized they were. It's a marker of upper-middle-class status, to be thin-skinned and announce how vulnerable you are. People who are truly victimized and marginalized and who've had difficult experiences, develop mental calluses and say, "Yeah, you go through some tough shit in your life, but you gotta get over it. You don't have time to dwell on it because the next challenge is right around the corner. You don't really have a lot of mental resources leftover to devote to, "Oh, poor me.
In my book, I tell readers to remember that Im fine now. My life is fine. So take those feelings that arise as you read about young Rob Henderson and channel them toward kids who are living in those unpromising situations right now, at this very moment. Think about those kids.
**
Michael Malice:I think that's a great answer. I remember vividly this video, which you may have seenit went viral. There was like this five- or six-year-old kid, and he's slapping his mom, and he's screaming at her, and all these conservatives were getting very kind of racist about itlike, "Oh my God, where's the dad?" It's like, no, she's nodding outhe's seen her nodding out from heroin repeatedly, and this kid is traumatized, and he's trying to keep his mom from ODing or nodding out. This is not him acting out in the same way. But it's like, to your point, they're fortunate that they don't know what it looks like when someone has used heroin and is nodding outthis is another planet to them.
I think that's a great answer. I remember vividly this video, which you may have seenit went viral. There was like this five- or six-year-old kid, and he's slapping his mom, and he's screaming at her, and all these conservatives were getting very kind of racist about itlike, "Oh my God, where's the dad?" It's like, no, she's nodding outhe's seen her nodding out from heroin repeatedly, and this kid is traumatized, and he's trying to keep his mom from ODing or nodding out. This is not him acting out in the same way. But it's like, to your point, they're fortunate that they don't know what it looks like when someone has used heroin and is nodding outthis is another planet to them.
Rob Henderson:I never knew who my father was. A forensic psychologist asked my birth mother, "Where is Robert's father?" and she didn't know. She didn't even know who he was. I didn't learn anything about that side of my family until I took a 23andMe ancestry test last year and discovered that my father was Mexican.
I never knew who my father was. A forensic psychologist asked my birth mother, "Where is Robert's father?" and she didn't know. She didn't even know who he was. I didn't learn anything about that side of my family until I took a 23andMe ancestry test last year and discovered that my father was Mexican.
Michael Malice:You're ambiguousyou could be Native American, you could be Asian. So how many days did you cry when you found out you're Mexican? Talk about trauma.
You're ambiguousyou could be Native American, you could be Asian. So how many days did you cry when you found out you're Mexican? Talk about trauma.
[laughter]
Rob Henderson:It was tough. But it did help me understand my love for spicy food.
It was tough. But it did help me understand my love for spicy food.
Michael Malice:Korean food is spicy too.
Korean food is spicy too.
Rob Henderson:That's true. There's also the thicc Latinas meme, which I understand more than most Koreans I think.
That's true. There's also the thicc Latinas meme, which I understand more than most Koreans I think.
[laughter]
Michael Malice:Let me ask about this. When you're a kid being shunted from foster home to foster home, can you please explain as best you can what that's like emotionally? Because to me, that just seems like the height of trauma. Like, who has custody of you every step of the way, you know what I mean?
Let me ask about this. When you're a kid being shunted from foster home to foster home, can you please explain as best you can what that's like emotionally? Because to me, that just seems like the height of trauma. Like, who has custody of you every step of the way, you know what I mean?
Rob Henderson:Yeah, yeah. So first, it's the police. Then they call a social worker. The social worker arrives.
Yeah, yeah. So first, it's the police. Then they call a social worker. The social worker arrives.
Michael Malice:Was she friendly? Was she trying to be engaging?
Was she friendly? Was she trying to be engaging?
Rob Henderson:She was nice. Yeah, my social worker was nice. She was a nice woman. She probably had a lot of experience dealing with very upset kids, and she did
She was nice. Yeah, my social worker was nice. She was a nice woman. She probably had a lot of experience dealing with very upset kids, and she did
Michael Malice:How did she explain who she was to you?
How did she explain who she was to you?
Rob Henderson:I don't even remember that. That first conversation, I just remember by the time I arrived at my first home and I saw her for the second time, that's when it clicked for me that she's kind of this distant babysitter or something, this person who's just kind of looking out for me.
I don't even remember that. That first conversation, I just remember by the time I arrived at my first home and I saw her for the second time, that's when it clicked for me that she's kind of this distant babysitter or something, this person who's just kind of looking out for me.
Michael Malice:Like a guardian something.
Like a guardian something.
Rob Henderson:Exactly. And so she buckled me up into this car seat, took me to the first home.
Exactly. And so she buckled me up into this car seat, took me to the first home.
Michael Malice:Wait, can I ask, was that at all reassuring that there's a grown-up who's here looking out for me?
Wait, can I ask, was that at all reassuring that there's a grown-up who's here looking out for me?
Rob Henderson:Yes, it was. Every time I saw her, I was happy. And she would explain to me, "I'm not going to be able to stay, but I will be checking in on you." So she would show up every couple of weeks, maybe once a month. Sometimes she was very busy. I mean, that's one of the thingsthe LA County foster system is so overburdened that they don't always get to monitor the kids as much as they like.
Yes, it was. Every time I saw her, I was happy. And she would explain to me, "I'm not going to be able to stay, but I will be checking in on you." So she would show up every couple of weeks, maybe once a month. Sometimes she was very busy. I mean, that's one of the thingsthe LA County foster system is so overburdened that they don't always get to monitor the kids as much as they like.
Michael Malice:Did she explain to you in a way you could understand why you couldn't be with your mom?
Did she explain to you in a way you could understand why you couldn't be with your mom?
Rob Henderson:So the early memories are fuzzy around that, but later they became more clear. So that wasI was three. But by the time I was four or five years old, and I would ask her, you know, I still askedeven at five, I would still ask, "Where's my mom? How's she doing?" And my social worker would say, "She's not well." Eventually, my birth mother was deported. She was from Seoul, and she was not a US citizen. She came to the US to study initially, so she was on a visa. I was a US citizen; I was born in LA, and so I just got sucked into the system. My motherI think she tried to sober up, and it never really panned out for her, and eventually, they just sent her back.
So the early memories are fuzzy around that, but later they became more clear. So that wasI was three. But by the time I was four or five years old, and I would ask her, you know, I still askedeven at five, I would still ask, "Where's my mom? How's she doing?" And my social worker would say, "She's not well." Eventually, my birth mother was deported. She was from Seoul, and she was not a US citizen. She came to the US to study initially, so she was on a visa. I was a US citizen; I was born in LA, and so I just got sucked into the system. My motherI think she tried to sober up, and it never really panned out for her, and eventually, they just sent her back.
So that first move was difficult. The second move was also extremely difficultgoing from the first home where, just as I had started to adjust a bit and develop some relationships with my foster siblings, the foster parents were pretty checked out. This home had probably upwards of eight or ten kids living in it, and with that many kids, you just don't havethe foster parents just don't have the ability to
Michael Malice:Of course.
Of course.
Rob Henderson:And so we mostly just kind of watched out for each other. I didn't have school yet, and so I just remember it was kind of this indoor jungle gym of kids everywhere.
And so we mostly just kind of watched out for each other. I didn't have school yet, and so I just remember it was kind of this indoor jungle gym of kids everywhere.
Michael Malice:But I feel like that would be reassuring in the sense that you're not alone and you're with other kids.
But I feel like that would be reassuring in the sense that you're not alone and you're with other kids.
Rob Henderson:It was difficult in the sense that there was a lot of unpredictability as far as how long any given kid would stay there. And I was unprepared for that. I'd make friends with a foster sibling, and thenyeah, usually it was, I'd make friends mostly with the boys, and they would be taken and sent off to some other home. Girls too, of course. And then a new kid would arrive, and that would kind of throw off the energy of the house for a while, and you'd figure out who this kid is and what he's like, and is he going to be friendly or unfriendly? So that's one part of foster care I think a lot of people don't think that much aboutthat yes, you will be relocated a lot, but then in any given home you're in, you're never certain who's going to be in that house the next day or the next week. You have a relationship with a foster sibling, and suddenly they're taken back with their birth parents or shuttled off to another home. It's an extreme level of stress for a kid. You can imagineone day you have your brother, and then one day your brother's taken from you, and you don't know if you're ever going to see him again. And then some other kid shows up. That kind of unpredictability was really hard.
It was difficult in the sense that there was a lot of unpredictability as far as how long any given kid would stay there. And I was unprepared for that. I'd make friends with a foster sibling, and thenyeah, usually it was, I'd make friends mostly with the boys, and they would be taken and sent off to some other home. Girls too, of course. And then a new kid would arrive, and that would kind of throw off the energy of the house for a while, and you'd figure out who this kid is and what he's like, and is he going to be friendly or unfriendly? So that's one part of foster care I think a lot of people don't think that much aboutthat yes, you will be relocated a lot, but then in any given home you're in, you're never certain who's going to be in that house the next day or the next week. You have a relationship with a foster sibling, and suddenly they're taken back with their birth parents or shuttled off to another home. It's an extreme level of stress for a kid. You can imagineone day you have your brother, and then one day your brother's taken from you, and you don't know if you're ever going to see him again. And then some other kid shows up. That kind of unpredictability was really hard.
Michael Malice:Is there part of your brain that thinks this is your fault, that "I did something wrong and now youre being taken to another home?
Is there part of your brain that thinks this is your fault, that "I did something wrong and now youre being taken to another home?
Rob Henderson:Its not conscious in that way. But emotionally, I think the answer is yes. As adults, we know the system works how it works and the world is messy and complicated. But as a kid, you think, "If these people really cared about me, they wouldn't allow me to be taken from them, or they wouldn't pull me away from this home or put me in another home." Because you don't know the intricacies of the system and how there are laws and so on. All you think is, "I lived here, and I'm comfortable here, and I know the people here, and now you're putting me somewhere else." I did have a conscious thought related to this, that I had in the last home I lived in. I was with my foster mother, and she was a cold and cruel woman who essentially just used me to do chores around the house, rake leaves and clean gutters and pull weeds and this kind of stuff.
Its not conscious in that way. But emotionally, I think the answer is yes. As adults, we know the system works how it works and the world is messy and complicated. But as a kid, you think, "If these people really cared about me, they wouldn't allow me to be taken from them, or they wouldn't pull me away from this home or put me in another home." Because you don't know the intricacies of the system and how there are laws and so on. All you think is, "I lived here, and I'm comfortable here, and I know the people here, and now you're putting me somewhere else." I did have a conscious thought related to this, that I had in the last home I lived in. I was with my foster mother, and she was a cold and cruel woman who essentially just used me to do chores around the house, rake leaves and clean gutters and pull weeds and this kind of stuff.
Michael Malice:Wait, and you didn't know you were Mexican then?
Wait, and you didn't know you were Mexican then?
[laughter]
Rob Henderson:I was also the pool boy; I cleaned the pool too, so yeah, I should have figured it out that I had Mexican heritage.
I was also the pool boy; I cleaned the pool too, so yeah, I should have figured it out that I had Mexican heritage.
Michael Malice:Come on, man, you went to Yale. I can't connect those dots?
Come on, man, you went to Yale. I can't connect those dots?
[laughter]
Rob Henderson:I was the, uh, you know, kind of a landscaper, the seven-year-old landscaper at this house, and I'm with my foster mother, who actually was Mexicanmy foster mother at this point. My friend's stepdad walked by and said, "Hey Rob, you know, we haven't seen you in a while. You know, when are you and Julian gonna hang out again?" And my foster mother just stepped outside and looked at him and looked at me, and I could tell she wanted me to not engage with this guy. She just didn't want me to have contact with the outside world at that moment, at least. And that was when I felt that my fate and my life and my decisions were all in the hands of these people who I don't really trust. And heres a guy over there who's being nice to me, my friends stepdad, he's just asking me a question, and I'm not allowed to answer him. That was a moment where I felt isolated and truly alone in the world.
I was the, uh, you know, kind of a landscaper, the seven-year-old landscaper at this house, and I'm with my foster mother, who actually was Mexicanmy foster mother at this point. My friend's stepdad walked by and said, "Hey Rob, you know, we haven't seen you in a while. You know, when are you and Julian gonna hang out again?" And my foster mother just stepped outside and looked at him and looked at me, and I could tell she wanted me to not engage with this guy. She just didn't want me to have contact with the outside world at that moment, at least. And that was when I felt that my fate and my life and my decisions were all in the hands of these people who I don't really trust. And heres a guy over there who's being nice to me, my friends stepdad, he's just asking me a question, and I'm not allowed to answer him. That was a moment where I felt isolated and truly alone in the world.
But to go back to the earlier point, the emotional difficulty kind of stopped after the third home. By the time I got there, I think what happens to kids in these situationsyour body can't handle that level of stress on a regular basis. We are an extremely resilient species, so we adapt. And so the coping response was to basically just shut off completelyno emotions, no sadness, no pain. There was anger, uh, but because I think to some extent I required anger in order to sort of defend myself and interact with the other foster kids. You have to be a little bit tough and a little bit kind of aggressive sometimes. The anger remained, but sadness or vulnerability or those things, I learned to shut those offnot consciously, of course, this instinctive. And that had a spillover effect in the sense that Ialso lost the ability to feel joy as well. For a while I was just this numb kid who wouldn't really feel much of anything unless I needed to activate a bit of that aggressive energy just to get some kid to back off or look tough. I wanted to look cool, of course. You know, each timeI mean, this is the thing with little boys, little girls probably toojust, you know, you want to look like a cool, tough kid. And so, you know, I'd get into fights and, you know, run around with some of the troublemakers in the neighborhood, and so, you know, there was a bit of that bravado. And it wasn't until later, as an adult, that I started to realize, like, "Wow, like, my emotional configuration got rewired.
Michael Malice:Yeah, a littleI mean, I can relate. A lot of this hits close to home. Like, I'll give you an example of something with me in, like, Soviet culture. Uh, I wasI don't know if I was taughtI don't think I was ever taught this explicitly, but until I was an adult, and I still do it to some extent, before I talk to someone or while I'm talking to them, my brain runs a scan that says, "If this person turns on me, was this information that I'm about to give themcan they use it against me?" And I did this literally constantly 24/7, and at a certain point, it's like, "Okay, some people are going to turn on you, but it's not like you have to be afraid of taking that punch. At a certain point, you're going to be able to take that punch." And it also, like you said, it deadens you so much because it makes you unable to form real connections. So it was a conscious attempt to kind of, you know, take that away, and I'm very glad that I did. But again, like, you know, to your point, you have to realize, "Oh [ __ ], like, this is where this is coming from, and now it's not being useful at all, it's being extremely counterproductive."
Yeah, a littleI mean, I can relate. A lot of this hits close to home. Like, I'll give you an example of something with me in, like, Soviet culture. Uh, I wasI don't know if I was taughtI don't think I was ever taught this explicitly, but until I was an adult, and I still do it to some extent, before I talk to someone or while I'm talking to them, my brain runs a scan that says, "If this person turns on me, was this information that I'm about to give themcan they use it against me?" And I did this literally constantly 24/7, and at a certain point, it's like, "Okay, some people are going to turn on you, but it's not like you have to be afraid of taking that punch. At a certain point, you're going to be able to take that punch." And it also, like you said, it deadens you so much because it makes you unable to form real connections. So it was a conscious attempt to kind of, you know, take that away, and I'm very glad that I did. But again, like, you know, to your point, you have to realize, "Oh [ __ ], like, this is where this is coming from, and now it's not being useful at all, it's being extremely counterproductive."
Rob Henderson:Its also very, uh, useful, right? Like, you have to behave that way; you have to put on a bit of that armor in those environments because if you don't have it, you are at risk for being exploited or taken advantage of or, um, sort of attracting potential unwanted attention or predators. And so you have to learn to be vigilant.
Its also very, uh, useful, right? Like, you have to behave that way; you have to put on a bit of that armor in those environments because if you don't have it, you are at risk for being exploited or taken advantage of or, um, sort of attracting potential unwanted attention or predators. And so you have to learn to be vigilant.
Michael Malice:At what age did you realize that you are intellectually gifted?
At what age did you realize that you are intellectually gifted?
Rob Henderson:What made clear to me that I had some potential was when I took the ASVAB, a military standardized test. This test is essentially an IQ testits highly correlated with IQ; its highly correlated with SAT scores. The military recruiter stared at my result and said, "You qualify for every job in the Air Force." He showed me that you could convert ASVAB results into SAT scores; theres some chart in a formula, and he showed me. And I noticed that my scores on the SAT would have been the same as one of my classmates who always got straight As and was going off to college.
What made clear to me that I had some potential was when I took the ASVAB, a military standardized test. This test is essentially an IQ testits highly correlated with IQ; its highly correlated with SAT scores. The military recruiter stared at my result and said, "You qualify for every job in the Air Force." He showed me that you could convert ASVAB results into SAT scores; theres some chart in a formula, and he showed me. And I noticed that my scores on the SAT would have been the same as one of my classmates who always got straight As and was going off to college.
Michael Malice:Let me ask this. For me growing up, one big solace was books and kind of reading books and getting lost in books. My favorite author is E. Nesbit. Sheactually, this is the 100th anniversary of her death, and I'm going to London to visit her grave. Were you a big reader growing up?
Let me ask this. For me growing up, one big solace was books and kind of reading books and getting lost in books. My favorite author is E. Nesbit. Sheactually, this is the 100th anniversary of her death, and I'm going to London to visit her grave. Were you a big reader growing up?
Rob Henderson:Huge, huge reader. I loved books. So one of the reasons why I scored low on the verbal section of that test was because no one read to me in the homes, and I didnt really have much interest in it. It was hard for me at first. So I eventually learned to teach myself how to read. And, you know, I was in second grade, and I was reading kindergarten books and sort of working my way up. But once I developed the ability to read properly, I was reading all the time. You know, I'd visit the school library, or sometimes a teacher would notice, you know, "Oh, you know, this kid likes to read," so they'd let me borrow a book. And yeah, I was like the only one of my friends in my friend group who regularly read books.
Huge, huge reader. I loved books. So one of the reasons why I scored low on the verbal section of that test was because no one read to me in the homes, and I didnt really have much interest in it. It was hard for me at first. So I eventually learned to teach myself how to read. And, you know, I was in second grade, and I was reading kindergarten books and sort of working my way up. But once I developed the ability to read properly, I was reading all the time. You know, I'd visit the school library, or sometimes a teacher would notice, you know, "Oh, you know, this kid likes to read," so they'd let me borrow a book. And yeah, I was like the only one of my friends in my friend group who regularly read books.
Michael Malice:And who were the authors that you enjoyed as a kid? Do you remember?
And who were the authors that you enjoyed as a kid? Do you remember?
Rob Henderson:So yeah, when I was a really little kid, it was like Encyclopedia Brown, The Boxcar Kids, Goosebumps. You know, every once in a while, my adoptive parents would allow me to buy a book from one of the Scholastic school catalogs.
So yeah, when I was a really little kid, it was like Encyclopedia Brown, The Boxcar Kids, Goosebumps. You know, every once in a while, my adoptive parents would allow me to buy a book from one of the Scholastic school catalogs.
Michael Malice:I got to share an anecdote with you which might hit close to home. I remember as a kid being very triggered by an Encyclopedia Brown story becausebecause Encyclopedia Brown's liketheres this kid, hes really smart. Encyclopedia BrownI don't know if you ever read Cam Jansen; that's the girl with the photographic memory; that was histheres another series. Anyway, okay, the point is that these stories are these mysteries, and as a kid, you have to figure out if you could get the mystery. And then, at the end, Encyclopedia Brown, whos basically Sherlock Holmes, now that I think about it, which should have been obvious to me, but I guess I didnt know Sherlock Holmes was the kid, never thought about it, would reveal the solution. And there was one storyand Im getting angry as I think about it even nowbecause they found a cave painting in their hometown, and the cave painting had a caveman fighting a dinosaur. And thats how Encyclopedia Brown knew it was fake because dinosaurs and cavemen were not contemporaneous. And I remember being in first or second grade, Im like, "Everyone knows this. This doesnt take a genius to be like, this is fake." Cavemen didoh, thank you, Encyclopedia Brown. It drove me crazy, and it still does.
I got to share an anecdote with you which might hit close to home. I remember as a kid being very triggered by an Encyclopedia Brown story becausebecause Encyclopedia Brown's liketheres this kid, hes really smart. Encyclopedia BrownI don't know if you ever read Cam Jansen; that's the girl with the photographic memory; that was histheres another series. Anyway, okay, the point is that these stories are these mysteries, and as a kid, you have to figure out if you could get the mystery. And then, at the end, Encyclopedia Brown, whos basically Sherlock Holmes, now that I think about it, which should have been obvious to me, but I guess I didnt know Sherlock Holmes was the kid, never thought about it, would reveal the solution. And there was one storyand Im getting angry as I think about it even nowbecause they found a cave painting in their hometown, and the cave painting had a caveman fighting a dinosaur. And thats how Encyclopedia Brown knew it was fake because dinosaurs and cavemen were not contemporaneous. And I remember being in first or second grade, Im like, "Everyone knows this. This doesnt take a genius to be like, this is fake." Cavemen didoh, thank you, Encyclopedia Brown. It drove me crazy, and it still does.
Rob Henderson:If only he had that arcane knowledge.
If only he had that arcane knowledge.
Michael Malice:Yeah, yeah, you had to be Sherlock Holmes to have that level of, you know, the historical timeline.
Yeah, yeah, you had to be Sherlock Holmes to have that level of, you know, the historical timeline.
Rob Henderson:The evolutionary timeline, yeah.
The evolutionary timeline, yeah.
Michael Malice:Everyones baffled. "Wow, how did you know that, Encyclopedia Brown?" "Well, okay, fine."
Everyones baffled. "Wow, how did you know that, Encyclopedia Brown?" "Well, okay, fine."
Rob Henderson:Okay, well, for me, I dont know if I ever read that, but yeah, I remember enjoying some of the other mysteriesHardy Boys, The Three Investigators. Those were kind of older, I think like 1950s or 60s. But yeah, I rented those from the library, and I dont know. I guess they were kind of intellectually stimulating for me. And then, by the time, you know, middle school, high school years, I read kind of more, I dont know, dark or sort of gritty stuff. I readBlack Boyby Richard Wrighthis experiences growing up in the Jim Crow South and then going to Chicago. This was in the early 20th century, like, you know, really extreme racism. And then, what else did II readso I watchedno, no, noI read the book first and then I watchedI readRaging Bullby Jake LaMotta.
Okay, well, for me, I dont know if I ever read that, but yeah, I remember enjoying some of the other mysteriesHardy Boys, The Three Investigators. Those were kind of older, I think like 1950s or 60s. But yeah, I rented those from the library, and I dont know. I guess they were kind of intellectually stimulating for me. And then, by the time, you know, middle school, high school years, I read kind of more, I dont know, dark or sort of gritty stuff. I read
by Richard Wrighthis experiences growing up in the Jim Crow South and then going to Chicago. This was in the early 20th century, like, you know, really extreme racism. And then, what else did II readso I watchedno, no, noI read the book first and then I watchedI read
by Jake LaMotta.
Michael Malice:Okay.
Okay.
Rob Henderson:It was the memoir of this Italian American boxer from the early 20th centuryreally brutal. And they made it into a movie, and I didnt know this until later. I remember, like, a year or two later after I read itI was like 14walking through Blockbuster when those still existed, and sawRaging Bullstarring Robert De Niro. And I watched the movie, and everyone loves this movie. The books way better, honestly, because the book is just way more violent and graphic and brutal. Theres a rape scene in there; its just really messed up. And at 12 years old, I probably shouldnt have been reading it, but I remember it was just, um, to sort of get a glimpse into other peoples lives and other peoples, what, drama and difficulty and how they were able to rise above it and find their own indirect and thorny path to success was interesting to me. I read this other book called, I think it was calledDaughter of Joy. This woman in San Francisco around the time of the Gold Rushshe was this Chinese American woman who was a prostitute in San Francisco, and she would talk about what it was like to do that job. And, you know, again, Im like 13 years old reading this stuff, but there was something, um, I dont know, I found soothing about itthat other people could go through so much difficulty in their life and find a way to endure and survive and be resilient and relay these stories and what they thought about them. So that was kind of the stuff I read once I was, you know, I guess past adolescence and puberty, once I started to develop more interest in more dense material.
It was the memoir of this Italian American boxer from the early 20th centuryreally brutal. And they made it into a movie, and I didnt know this until later. I remember, like, a year or two later after I read itI was like 14walking through Blockbuster when those still existed, and saw
starring Robert De Niro. And I watched the movie, and everyone loves this movie. The books way better, honestly, because the book is just way more violent and graphic and brutal. Theres a rape scene in there; its just really messed up. And at 12 years old, I probably shouldnt have been reading it, but I remember it was just, um, to sort of get a glimpse into other peoples lives and other peoples, what, drama and difficulty and how they were able to rise above it and find their own indirect and thorny path to success was interesting to me. I read this other book called, I think it was called
. This woman in San Francisco around the time of the Gold Rushshe was this Chinese American woman who was a prostitute in San Francisco, and she would talk about what it was like to do that job. And, you know, again, Im like 13 years old reading this stuff, but there was something, um, I dont know, I found soothing about itthat other people could go through so much difficulty in their life and find a way to endure and survive and be resilient and relay these stories and what they thought about them. So that was kind of the stuff I read once I was, you know, I guess past adolescence and puberty, once I started to develop more interest in more dense material.
Michael Malice:Theres this meme on the internetI think it started on 4chancalled "You Laugh, You Lose," right? People post pictures, and if you laugh, you lose the kind of bet. Theres a series of videos that I will tell people called "You Cry, You Lose." And everyone listening to this, if you watch these videos on YouTube, youre going to start crying. The first series is people hearing for the first time. They have deaf people, and then they turn on the cochlear implant, and just like, you watch it, youre going to start cryingI promise. And sometimes its like some big dude whos like 62, 250, and he just starts to hear for the first time, and you just watch ityoure hysterical. The other videos are kids being told theyre being adopted. And itll be like a Christmas present, and they give a box, they open the box, and its like, "Will you be my son?" And you watch it, youre like, "I cant even talk about it." So, can you tell us what that was like for you? Im sorry, Im not trying to bring out the waterworks, but this is just intense stuff, and I thank you so much for sharing itlike, that moment where youre like, "Im gonna finally have a home of my own."
Theres this meme on the internetI think it started on 4chancalled "You Laugh, You Lose," right? People post pictures, and if you laugh, you lose the kind of bet. Theres a series of videos that I will tell people called "You Cry, You Lose." And everyone listening to this, if you watch these videos on YouTube, youre going to start crying. The first series is people hearing for the first time. They have deaf people, and then they turn on the cochlear implant, and just like, you watch it, youre going to start cryingI promise. And sometimes its like some big dude whos like 62, 250, and he just starts to hear for the first time, and you just watch ityoure hysterical. The other videos are kids being told theyre being adopted. And itll be like a Christmas present, and they give a box, they open the box, and its like, "Will you be my son?" And you watch it, youre like, "I cant even talk about it." So, can you tell us what that was like for you? Im sorry, Im not trying to bring out the waterworks, but this is just intense stuff, and I thank you so much for sharing itlike, that moment where youre like, "Im gonna finally have a home of my own."
Rob Henderson:Yeah, you know, yeah, I get that. Its funny, like, as youre describing it, and Im picturing it in my mind, so I can understand why that would be so powerful. Im thinking about it from the position of just being that kid. And so, the way it happened for me at least, was I was living with Mrs. Martinez, my foster mom at the time, and she said, "Hey, you know, were going to watch this video." And shewe never watched movies.
Yeah, you know, yeah, I get that. Its funny, like, as youre describing it, and Im picturing it in my mind, so I can understand why that would be so powerful. Im thinking about it from the position of just being that kid. And so, the way it happened for me at least, was I was living with Mrs. Martinez, my foster mom at the time, and she said, "Hey, you know, were going to watch this video." And shewe never watched movies.
Michael Malice:Im sorry, you just called her Mrs. Martinez. Did you call any of these peoplewhat I meant is, did you call anyone "mom" your whole life?
Im sorry, you just called her Mrs. Martinez. Did you call any of these peoplewhat I meant is, did you call anyone "mom" your whole life?
Rob Henderson:Oh no. My adoptive mother, yes. I mean, up to that point, no one was ever "mom."
Oh no. My adoptive mother, yes. I mean, up to that point, no one was ever "mom."
Michael Malice:No, no, no, it was always Mrs. Delapena, Mrs. Martinez, Mrs. So-and-so? It was always like women who were responsible for caretaking. I just want to
No, no, no, it was always Mrs. Delapena, Mrs. Martinez, Mrs. So-and-so? It was always like women who were responsible for caretaking. I just want to
Rob Henderson:Yeah, it was always very formal. And so, you know, she pulls out a VHS tapethis is 1997. So we watched this videotape, and it wasyou know, immediately, Im like, whats going on? Because sometimes she would let me watch TV, but we never watched anything together. And so, she puts in this cassette tape, and suddenly, you know, I see this family, this man, this woman, this little girl who was their birth daughter named Hannah, who became my adoptive sister. So were watching this video, and theyre like, "Hey, you know, were the Henderson family, and we just want to let you know were going to come visit you soon, and we hope to adopt you," and blah blah blah. And Im like, you know, confusedseven years old. Im like, okay, what? Like, adopt? What is that? Like, is this my new foster family? Am I going with them next? Why are we watching a video? Ive never watched a video of a family before living with them. And Mrs. Martinez kind of, you know, shes like, "Well, you know, they want towhen they adopt you, that means like theyre going to be your mom and dad, and youre not going to be moving anywhere else after this." And that was like, "Oh, like, thats how it happens." You know, like, I was too young to understand, like, you know, the intricacies of how families form and how babies are made or all those things. I just thought like, "Oh, so thats how kids get moms and dads."
Yeah, it was always very formal. And so, you know, she pulls out a VHS tapethis is 1997. So we watched this videotape, and it wasyou know, immediately, Im like, whats going on? Because sometimes she would let me watch TV, but we never watched anything together. And so, she puts in this cassette tape, and suddenly, you know, I see this family, this man, this woman, this little girl who was their birth daughter named Hannah, who became my adoptive sister. So were watching this video, and theyre like, "Hey, you know, were the Henderson family, and we just want to let you know were going to come visit you soon, and we hope to adopt you," and blah blah blah. And Im like, you know, confusedseven years old. Im like, okay, what? Like, adopt? What is that? Like, is this my new foster family? Am I going with them next? Why are we watching a video? Ive never watched a video of a family before living with them. And Mrs. Martinez kind of, you know, shes like, "Well, you know, they want towhen they adopt you, that means like theyre going to be your mom and dad, and youre not going to be moving anywhere else after this." And that was like, "Oh, like, thats how it happens." You know, like, I was too young to understand, like, you know, the intricacies of how families form and how babies are made or all those things. I just thought like, "Oh, so thats how kids get moms and dads."
Michael Malice:I love kid logic. I took my nephew to Mar-a-Lago a couple of months ago for a movie premiere, and I go, "Oh, were going to the presidents house," and he goes, "The White House?" And I go, "No, no, no." He goes, "Abe Lincoln?" And Im like, these are great answersit makes perfect sense in your context.
I love kid logic. I took my nephew to Mar-a-Lago a couple of months ago for a movie premiere, and I go, "Oh, were going to the presidents house," and he goes, "The White House?" And I go, "No, no, no." He goes, "Abe Lincoln?" And Im like, these are great answersit makes perfect sense in your context.
Rob Henderson:Yeah, right, yeah, yeah. And that was the extent of it. It was like, "Oh, okay, this is how, you know, okay, Im getting a mom and a dad now. Theyre gonna come visit me."
Yeah, right, yeah, yeah. And that was the extent of it. It was like, "Oh, okay, this is how, you know, okay, Im getting a mom and a dad now. Theyre gonna come visit me."
Michael Malice:They told you you were getting adopted before you even met them?
They told you you were getting adopted before you even met them?
Rob Henderson:My foster mom said, "The Henderson family is going to come to visit you. You know, they basically want to kind of see how things get along, and you know, its ultimately up to your adoptiveor its up to the Henderson family and your social worker how things go. But, you know, as of now, it looks like youre going to get adopted."
My foster mom said, "The Henderson family is going to come to visit you. You know, they basically want to kind of see how things get along, and you know, its ultimately up to your adoptiveor its up to the Henderson family and your social worker how things go. But, you know, as of now, it looks like youre going to get adopted."
Michael Malice:I really want to break this down. Is there a sense in your kid's brain that, "Holy [expletive], Im beingthis is like an audition, so I better be on my best behavior"?
I really want to break this down. Is there a sense in your kid's brain that, "Holy [expletive], Im beingthis is like an audition, so I better be on my best behavior"?
Rob Henderson:Not really. I mean, no.
Not really. I mean, no.
Michael Malice:But, I mean, it wasnt a done deal, right? Because if you were a little terror, they could have been like, "Sorry, its not happening." So did you have that awareness?
But, I mean, it wasnt a done deal, right? Because if you were a little terror, they could have been like, "Sorry, its not happening." So did you have that awareness?
Rob Henderson:I think I hadit wasnt so much like II mean, this is maybe more kid logic or more just kind of like little boy logic, but it wasnt like, "I want to impress them because I want them to adopt me and like me and be my mom and dad." It was more like
I think I hadit wasnt so much like II mean, this is maybe more kid logic or more just kind of like little boy logic, but it wasnt like, "I want to impress them because I want them to adopt me and like me and be my mom and dad." It was more like
Michael Malice:"They seem really nice."
"They seem really nice."
Rob Henderson:"They seem really nice in this video, and you know, I want them to like me just because I want them to like me." That was it. And that was kind of the extent of it. And soand like, you know, I was kind of aI dont know, I was an energetic boy anyway. And like, yes, it could turn into mischief in school and stuff, but I could also behave if I needed to. And I was able to do that. They took me to the zoo; then they took me to a park. I remember one moment when they took me to the park, and I called my, you know, the person who became my adoptive mother, I called her Mrs. Henderson. I had a question: "Hey, Mrs. Henderson, something," and she said, "You can just call me Mom if you want." And this was before the adoption had even been a done deal, but that was kind of what I knew, like, "Oh, okay, so this is really happening." And I didnt have any reservations or any deep thoughts about it. I just thought, "Okay, shes my mom now," and that was it. That was the extent of it. And this other person was my dad. And yeah, I just felt like it was nice to use those words.
"They seem really nice in this video, and you know, I want them to like me just because I want them to like me." That was it. And that was kind of the extent of it. And soand like, you know, I was kind of aI dont know, I was an energetic boy anyway. And like, yes, it could turn into mischief in school and stuff, but I could also behave if I needed to. And I was able to do that. They took me to the zoo; then they took me to a park. I remember one moment when they took me to the park, and I called my, you know, the person who became my adoptive mother, I called her Mrs. Henderson. I had a question: "Hey, Mrs. Henderson, something," and she said, "You can just call me Mom if you want." And this was before the adoption had even been a done deal, but that was kind of what I knew, like, "Oh, okay, so this is really happening." And I didnt have any reservations or any deep thoughts about it. I just thought, "Okay, shes my mom now," and that was it. That was the extent of it. And this other person was my dad. And yeah, I just felt like it was nice to use those words.
And then later, once Ionce we moved, or once I moved in with them into Red Bluff, California, which is aboutit was about an 8-hour drive from L.A., about an hour flight. Settled into Red Bluff, this kind of working-class town, this dusty town in northern California. Met my adoptive sister, who was their birth daughter. And I remember she and Iso when I first met her and realized, like, she was my sister, not, you know, not just a temporary kid who was going to live here and maybe she'd be takenor maybe Id be taken. And so, I understood that at a kind of superficial level, but it really became clear to me that she was a different kind of kid when, as soon as I arrived at the new home, you know, she was like, "Hey, I want to show you something." And you know, she shows me all of these toys in the living room, and Im like, "Thats a lot of toys," because in all the foster homes, usually there were either no toys or maybe there would be one toy, and it was usually like some leftover thing from a Happy Meal or a beat-up hockey puck or something.
Michael Malice:An apple core.
An apple core.
[laughter]
Rob Henderson:Yeah. A half-chewed pencil.
Yeah. A half-chewed pencil.
Michael Malice:A fly swatter.
A fly swatter.
[laughter]
Rob Henderson:Im looking at all these toys in the living room that she had laid out, and it was like a yo-yo, stuffed animals and all this kind of stuff. You know, the sticky hands, you remember sticky hands?
Im looking at all these toys in the living room that she had laid out, and it was like a yo-yo, stuffed animals and all this kind of stuff. You know, the sticky hands, you remember sticky hands?
Michael Malice:You know, that was created by a Korean.
You know, that was created by a Korean.
Rob Henderson:Oh, was it?
Oh, was it?
Michael Malice:He had a TV show that I auditioned for. Mr. Something, I forgot his name.
He had a TV show that I auditioned for. Mr. Something, I forgot his name.
Rob Henderson:Smart people, those Koreans.
Smart people, those Koreans.
Michael Malice:Yes.
Yes.
Rob Henderson:And so Im playing with these things, and I was like, "Yeah, thisI cant believe you have all these toys." And she was like, "You can have them if you want." And I was like, "Really?" And shes like, "Yeah, you couldyou know," shes like, "Its fine. You know, like, these are your toys." And Im like, "Well, what about you?" And shes like, "I have a lot of toys." Like, "Oh." And then she showed me this piggy bank. You know, she had this little plastic piggy bank thingits like half full of change. And shes like, "You can have half of that, too." And I was like, "Why?" And shes like, "You know, like sometimes Ill dig through the couch, or like, you know, Mom and Dad will give me a quarter, and Ill just put it in there or whatever. You know, Im just saving it up." And Im like, "Oh, okay." And she was just like a very generous little four-year-old. And, you know, I kind of understood that, you know, this was a kid whoyou know, so when youre in the foster homes, like, all of the resources are so scarce and limited and fleeting that you just have to cling on to anything you can get.
And so Im playing with these things, and I was like, "Yeah, thisI cant believe you have all these toys." And she was like, "You can have them if you want." And I was like, "Really?" And shes like, "Yeah, you couldyou know," shes like, "Its fine. You know, like, these are your toys." And Im like, "Well, what about you?" And shes like, "I have a lot of toys." Like, "Oh." And then she showed me this piggy bank. You know, she had this little plastic piggy bank thingits like half full of change. And shes like, "You can have half of that, too." And I was like, "Why?" And shes like, "You know, like sometimes Ill dig through the couch, or like, you know, Mom and Dad will give me a quarter, and Ill just put it in there or whatever. You know, Im just saving it up." And Im like, "Oh, okay." And she was just like a very generous little four-year-old. And, you know, I kind of understood that, you know, this was a kid whoyou know, so when youre in the foster homes, like, all of the resources are so scarce and limited and fleeting that you just have to cling on to anything you can get.
But when you're in a home where you have a mom and a dad and every day looks like the last day, and you don't have to worry about your stuff being taken or moved around, or you being taken or moved around, you have the kind of luxury of being a little bit generous. And when you get a new brother and you want him to like you, you give him some stuff. But at the time, all of those sophisticated thoughts weren't there. I was just like, "This is the nicest kid I've ever met, and I'm so glad she's my sister." I didn't really understand she was behaving this way because of her, at least compared to some of the other kids I've met, relatively comfortable life. I just thought, "This is the nicest person ever, and I'm going to make sure to look out for her." Even to this day, that memory just sort of cemented the bond I have with herjust instantly, just immediatelythat level of generosity she showed me.
Michael Malice:All I could think ofRob, I'm sorry, I have a very dark sense of humoris that I'm reminded of these videos where people take in a dog that's been on the street, and then they give the dog the food, and the dog starts growling and guarding the food. It's like, "I just gave you this food!" So, I'm just picturing her giving you these toys, then you're shoving her out of the way, "These are my toys! These are my toys! Get out of the way!" Are you and your sister still close, if I may ask?
All I could think ofRob, I'm sorry, I have a very dark sense of humoris that I'm reminded of these videos where people take in a dog that's been on the street, and then they give the dog the food, and the dog starts growling and guarding the food. It's like, "I just gave you this food!" So, I'm just picturing her giving you these toys, then you're shoving her out of the way, "These are my toys! These are my toys! Get out of the way!" Are you and your sister still close, if I may ask?
Rob Henderson:Oh, yeah. Yeah, of course. I was just at her wedding a couple of months ago. She just got married, and I gave one of the wedding speeches. I gave this very brief speech. My sister was in years, so was our mom. Later, the wedding DJ came up to menot patting myself on the back herebut the wedding DJ came up to me and he was like, "Dude, I've been doing weddings for 10 years, and that was the best wedding speech I've ever heard." And that was because I have all these vivid memories from her childhood and how she wasn't trying to be like, "Oh, here's this foster kid and I'm going to be nice to him." She was just who she was, intrinsically, a kind person.
Oh, yeah. Yeah, of course. I was just at her wedding a couple of months ago. She just got married, and I gave one of the wedding speeches. I gave this very brief speech. My sister was in years, so was our mom. Later, the wedding DJ came up to menot patting myself on the back herebut the wedding DJ came up to me and he was like, "Dude, I've been doing weddings for 10 years, and that was the best wedding speech I've ever heard." And that was because I have all these vivid memories from her childhood and how she wasn't trying to be like, "Oh, here's this foster kid and I'm going to be nice to him." She was just who she was, intrinsically, a kind person.
Michael Malice:Yeah, I had Brett Weinstein on the show a couple of weeks ago, and I told him my new favorite form of trolling is being very complimentary and very earnest because people don't know how to handle it. And then they startso you did that perfectly at the wedding because it's coming from a place of truth and pure kindness, and people really don't know how to react because it's such a beautiful reflectionit's like the sunlight in their eyes. Well done, sir.
Yeah, I had Brett Weinstein on the show a couple of weeks ago, and I told him my new favorite form of trolling is being very complimentary and very earnest because people don't know how to handle it. And then they startso you did that perfectly at the wedding because it's coming from a place of truth and pure kindness, and people really don't know how to react because it's such a beautiful reflectionit's like the sunlight in their eyes. Well done, sir.
Rob Henderson:Well, thanks. Yeah, yeah. I think it catches people off guard a little bit, that's true.
Well, thanks. Yeah, yeah. I think it catches people off guard a little bit, that's true.
Michael Malice:And what could they say? "Thank you, I'm great."
And what could they say? "Thank you, I'm great."
Rob Henderson:Yeah, yeah. I think it's weird, like even her reaction, because I said something along the lines of, "Everyone wants an older brother, right?" Not everyone, but a lot of people want an older brother because they think that they'll have this mentor, this person they can learn from, someone who can watch out for them. And as I think back to our upbringing and how I was compared to how she was, like, I was okay, but I definitely learned more from her as far as how to be a good human being than she learned from me. And I think she was just completely thrown off by that, and afterward, she was like, "You're a good brother." I'm like, "If you say so," because sometimes I don't know.
Yeah, yeah. I think it's weird, like even her reaction, because I said something along the lines of, "Everyone wants an older brother, right?" Not everyone, but a lot of people want an older brother because they think that they'll have this mentor, this person they can learn from, someone who can watch out for them. And as I think back to our upbringing and how I was compared to how she was, like, I was okay, but I definitely learned more from her as far as how to be a good human being than she learned from me. And I think she was just completely thrown off by that, and afterward, she was like, "You're a good brother." I'm like, "If you say so," because sometimes I don't know.
Michael Malice:One of the things that you touched on in this book, and one of the things you're most known for, is this idea of luxury beliefs. Can you break down a bit how you came into this understanding and what that means?
One of the things that you touched on in this book, and one of the things you're most known for, is this idea of luxury beliefs. Can you break down a bit how you came into this understanding and what that means?
Rob Henderson:Yeah, so fast-forwarding a bit here. My adoptive family was intact for about 18 months. There was a divorce. My adoptive father stopped speaking with me after this. I was raised by a single mom for a while. There were some family tragedies, financial catastrophes, all of these things. But, you know, I joined the Air Force at 17, did an enlistment, and finally, in my mid-20s, I finally figured out I should go to college. I arrived on campusI shot for the highest school I could possibly get into, managed to get into Yale.
Yeah, so fast-forwarding a bit here. My adoptive family was intact for about 18 months. There was a divorce. My adoptive father stopped speaking with me after this. I was raised by a single mom for a while. There were some family tragedies, financial catastrophes, all of these things. But, you know, I joined the Air Force at 17, did an enlistment, and finally, in my mid-20s, I finally figured out I should go to college. I arrived on campusI shot for the highest school I could possibly get into, managed to get into Yale.
Michael Malice:Were you shocked that you got in?
Were you shocked that you got in?
Rob Henderson:Yeah, yeah, dude. Iit was more likely than not that I wouldn't have. The only thing that saved me, and this is something that I've written at length about in various outlets, is that standardized testing is important. Because for a lot of kids, if you grew up the way that I did, your grades are going to be a mess because you don't have anyone monitoring you at home, checking in on whether you're doing homework. If you're changing schools all the time, you're not going to be able to explain to teachers what's going on with you, and it just doesn't work that way. But if you can set an afternoon aside and take the SAT or the ACT or whatever test it is, that can reveal potential in you that you may not have otherwise known you had. And so, despite the fact that I barely graduated high school, and I had taken some night classes at a community college while I was enlisted, and my academic record was very spotty, to say the least, I applied. And during the interview process, they were like, "We've seldom seen applications that look like this." And they were like, "Can you walk us through what happened here?" And I managed to convince them that my high school grades were not an accurate reflection of my true ability and told them a lot of the same stuff I'm telling you, that I talk about in my book, and managed to convince them to take a chance on me. They let me in, and yeah, I was justI was floored by this. And I arrived on campus, and it was just a completely different environment than I expected. It's funnylike, to some extent, I understood that Yale's a famous campus, and I knew there were going to be a lot of students from rich families and stuff like that, but as far as the cultural shock, I didn't quite anticipate it. Nowadays, if you walk around an Ivy League campus, it's not like people are wearing tweed jackets and puffing on a tobacco pipe or something. They look like normal college students that you would see at a normal flagship university. They wear flip-flops and cargo shorts, and they look like normal people. But then you dig around in their background, and it's like, "Oh, this person's dad is the president of NBC," and "This person's mom is a senator." But they dress in such a way that it sort of camouflages all of that wealth and privilege.
Yeah, yeah, dude. Iit was more likely than not that I wouldn't have. The only thing that saved me, and this is something that I've written at length about in various outlets, is that standardized testing is important. Because for a lot of kids, if you grew up the way that I did, your grades are going to be a mess because you don't have anyone monitoring you at home, checking in on whether you're doing homework. If you're changing schools all the time, you're not going to be able to explain to teachers what's going on with you, and it just doesn't work that way. But if you can set an afternoon aside and take the SAT or the ACT or whatever test it is, that can reveal potential in you that you may not have otherwise known you had. And so, despite the fact that I barely graduated high school, and I had taken some night classes at a community college while I was enlisted, and my academic record was very spotty, to say the least, I applied. And during the interview process, they were like, "We've seldom seen applications that look like this." And they were like, "Can you walk us through what happened here?" And I managed to convince them that my high school grades were not an accurate reflection of my true ability and told them a lot of the same stuff I'm telling you, that I talk about in my book, and managed to convince them to take a chance on me. They let me in, and yeah, I was justI was floored by this. And I arrived on campus, and it was just a completely different environment than I expected. It's funnylike, to some extent, I understood that Yale's a famous campus, and I knew there were going to be a lot of students from rich families and stuff like that, but as far as the cultural shock, I didn't quite anticipate it. Nowadays, if you walk around an Ivy League campus, it's not like people are wearing tweed jackets and puffing on a tobacco pipe or something. They look like normal college students that you would see at a normal flagship university. They wear flip-flops and cargo shorts, and they look like normal people. But then you dig around in their background, and it's like, "Oh, this person's dad is the president of NBC," and "This person's mom is a senator." But they dress in such a way that it sort of camouflages all of that wealth and privilege.
Michael Malice:It's counter-signaling.
It's counter-signaling.
Rob Henderson:Exactly, yeah. And so, you know, I'm on campus, and sometimes I say that I arrived to witnessand this is probably overstating thingsbut I arrived to witness the birth of wokeness, or what people call cancel culture, what have you, because this was 2015. Wokeness and cancel culture and this kind of stuff, it was kind of percolating maybe 2012, 2013. Jonathan Haidt writes about this inThe Coddling of the American Mindthat it maybe started a bit earlier, but by 2015, it was kind of well-cultivated in these elite institutions. And 2015 was the year where it started to really spill out. So by eight weeks into campus, I saw one of the first kind of big mid-2010s campus controversieswhat people call the Halloween costume controversy now at Yale. Long story short, the administration on campusI mean, it sounds ridiculous now saying it, but the administration sent out this campus-wide email saying, "Hey, be careful what you wear for Halloween. You shouldn't be culturally appropriating or wearing offensive costumes." That was the email from the administration. One of the professors who helped to oversee one of the residential colleges on campus sent out this email just to her students saying, "Hey, do we really need the administration interfering in our lives? You're all adults, enjoy your Halloween parties, and if you have difficulties or take issue with what people are wearing, just talk to each other," just defending freedom of expression. In response, hundreds of students marched around campus saying sheyou know, this person was a racist, her husband was racist. There are these viral videos of what happened on campus in 2015, and I was just bewildered by all of this. So, you know, I got out of the Air Force in August, started classes in September, and this all happened in October of Halloweenjust a complete culture shock. I was watching the sons and daughters of millionaires say they felt unsafe at one of the richest universities in the world. And so that was when the luxury beliefs idea started to take shapethese people, these graduates and students, and honestly, a lot of the administration, a lot of the faculty, a lot of the people who have affiliation with these elite institutions, just have no contact with reality, with the struggles and difficulties of ordinary people. So I lived off campus in New Haven, where Yale is, and New Haven itself is a very rundown town.
Exactly, yeah. And so, you know, I'm on campus, and sometimes I say that I arrived to witnessand this is probably overstating thingsbut I arrived to witness the birth of wokeness, or what people call cancel culture, what have you, because this was 2015. Wokeness and cancel culture and this kind of stuff, it was kind of percolating maybe 2012, 2013. Jonathan Haidt writes about this in
that it maybe started a bit earlier, but by 2015, it was kind of well-cultivated in these elite institutions. And 2015 was the year where it started to really spill out. So by eight weeks into campus, I saw one of the first kind of big mid-2010s campus controversieswhat people call the Halloween costume controversy now at Yale. Long story short, the administration on campusI mean, it sounds ridiculous now saying it, but the administration sent out this campus-wide email saying, "Hey, be careful what you wear for Halloween. You shouldn't be culturally appropriating or wearing offensive costumes." That was the email from the administration. One of the professors who helped to oversee one of the residential colleges on campus sent out this email just to her students saying, "Hey, do we really need the administration interfering in our lives? You're all adults, enjoy your Halloween parties, and if you have difficulties or take issue with what people are wearing, just talk to each other," just defending freedom of expression. In response, hundreds of students marched around campus saying sheyou know, this person was a racist, her husband was racist. There are these viral videos of what happened on campus in 2015, and I was just bewildered by all of this. So, you know, I got out of the Air Force in August, started classes in September, and this all happened in October of Halloweenjust a complete culture shock. I was watching the sons and daughters of millionaires say they felt unsafe at one of the richest universities in the world. And so that was when the luxury beliefs idea started to take shapethese people, these graduates and students, and honestly, a lot of the administration, a lot of the faculty, a lot of the people who have affiliation with these elite institutions, just have no contact with reality, with the struggles and difficulties of ordinary people. So I lived off campus in New Haven, where Yale is, and New Haven itself is a very rundown town.
Michael Malice:Oh yeah.
Oh yeah.
Rob Henderson:It's not safe. And I lived downtown, and so I would walk from campus, where the students are talking about privilege and cultural appropriation and heteronormativity, and then I'd walk through the New Haven Green to my apartment, and I would see people who are actually suffering from drug addiction and mental illness and homelessness and poverty. So I'd take those walks, and just that juxtaposition between how these students described their lives versus the people I was seeing on an everyday basis on my way home from class. And then I'd have these conversations with students around drugs and defunding the police and all of these topics that, for them, were abstractions. These were things that maybe made them feel good to explain and to talk about and to sort of puff up their chest and say, "This is how things should be run," while not really understanding that that's not how things work in reality.
It's not safe. And I lived downtown, and so I would walk from campus, where the students are talking about privilege and cultural appropriation and heteronormativity, and then I'd walk through the New Haven Green to my apartment, and I would see people who are actually suffering from drug addiction and mental illness and homelessness and poverty. So I'd take those walks, and just that juxtaposition between how these students described their lives versus the people I was seeing on an everyday basis on my way home from class. And then I'd have these conversations with students around drugs and defunding the police and all of these topics that, for them, were abstractions. These were things that maybe made them feel good to explain and to talk about and to sort of puff up their chest and say, "This is how things should be run," while not really understanding that that's not how things work in reality.
Michael Malice:Or actively not wanting to understand.
Or actively not wanting to understand.
Rob Henderson:There's that too. And I think in some cases there was active duplicity. So luxury beliefs I define as ideas and opinions that confer status on the elite while inflicting costs on the lower classes. And so, one thing that just occurred to me, and it's not quite a luxury belief, but it's an example of this kind of duplicity. I would see students on campus say things like, "Investment banks are emblematic of capitalist oppression and exploitation." And then I would see those same students weeks later hanging out at recruitment sessions on campus for Goldman Sachs. So essentially, their public position was, "These are evil places, exploitative, whatever," but privately, they were trying to get jobs at those places. And what I came to believe in many of these situations is that these people were essentially attempting to undercut their rivals. So if I want to get a job at some investment bank and I can convince you, Michael, that these jobs are evil and oppressive and exploitative and you don't apply and I do, that's one less rival that I have to vanquish in my path to riches and power and success. And there was a lot of this kind of calculating and maneuvering.
There's that too. And I think in some cases there was active duplicity. So luxury beliefs I define as ideas and opinions that confer status on the elite while inflicting costs on the lower classes. And so, one thing that just occurred to me, and it's not quite a luxury belief, but it's an example of this kind of duplicity. I would see students on campus say things like, "Investment banks are emblematic of capitalist oppression and exploitation." And then I would see those same students weeks later hanging out at recruitment sessions on campus for Goldman Sachs. So essentially, their public position was, "These are evil places, exploitative, whatever," but privately, they were trying to get jobs at those places. And what I came to believe in many of these situations is that these people were essentially attempting to undercut their rivals. So if I want to get a job at some investment bank and I can convince you, Michael, that these jobs are evil and oppressive and exploitative and you don't apply and I do, that's one less rival that I have to vanquish in my path to riches and power and success. And there was a lot of this kind of calculating and maneuvering.
Michael Malice:And also, from an evolutionary psychology perspective, it's even more effective if I don't realize that I'm doing it. If I say it with a straight face, I don't have to deal with the cognitive dissonance or the apparent disconnect between what I'm saying and how I'm behaving. So like I was saying at the start of the show, the fact that you bring in this kind of anthropological and evolutionary psychology approach to how people behave is why I'm such a fan of your work and why I think it's so useful for people to understand why humans, who are animals, behave the way they do. Instead of reading John Locke or Hobbes, read stuff like you're writing about, because at face value, it doesn't make sense. But then, as you once you just broke it down, it not only makes perfect sense, it's actually predictive of certain behaviors. And once you see it, you can't unsee it.
And also, from an evolutionary psychology perspective, it's even more effective if I don't realize that I'm doing it. If I say it with a straight face, I don't have to deal with the cognitive dissonance or the apparent disconnect between what I'm saying and how I'm behaving. So like I was saying at the start of the show, the fact that you bring in this kind of anthropological and evolutionary psychology approach to how people behave is why I'm such a fan of your work and why I think it's so useful for people to understand why humans, who are animals, behave the way they do. Instead of reading John Locke or Hobbes, read stuff like you're writing about, because at face value, it doesn't make sense. But then, as you once you just broke it down, it not only makes perfect sense, it's actually predictive of certain behaviors. And once you see it, you can't unsee it.
Rob Henderson:Yeah, yeah, the psychology of self-deception, this idea that if I want to convince you of something, the best way for me to do that is if I believe it myself. And you see a lot of this. These people who were puffing up their peacock feathers and talking about how society should be run or how these movements need more support or what have you. The white privilege idea was just bewildering to me because I grew up around a lot of poor white people, and I would see rich white people talking about white privilege. And, you know, superficially, it looked like they were saying, "Oh, I'm so privileged, I'm so whatever," but really, it really sounds like bragging, honestly, like, "I'm a beneficiary of this immense privilege, and it's so bad," and whatever. But what was really going on there is that they would talk about their own privilege, and as a consequence, they would receive even more status because their peers would hear this and think, "Oh, you're a good person." So not only do you have all of the benefits of studying at this elite university, of being a beneficiary of all of the wealth and success and so on, but now all of your peers are snapping their fingers and saying, "Oh, you're one of the good people." And your reputation gets boosted.
Yeah, yeah, the psychology of self-deception, this idea that if I want to convince you of something, the best way for me to do that is if I believe it myself. And you see a lot of this. These people who were puffing up their peacock feathers and talking about how society should be run or how these movements need more support or what have you. The white privilege idea was just bewildering to me because I grew up around a lot of poor white people, and I would see rich white people talking about white privilege. And, you know, superficially, it looked like they were saying, "Oh, I'm so privileged, I'm so whatever," but really, it really sounds like bragging, honestly, like, "I'm a beneficiary of this immense privilege, and it's so bad," and whatever. But what was really going on there is that they would talk about their own privilege, and as a consequence, they would receive even more status because their peers would hear this and think, "Oh, you're a good person." So not only do you have all of the benefits of studying at this elite university, of being a beneficiary of all of the wealth and success and so on, but now all of your peers are snapping their fingers and saying, "Oh, you're one of the good people." And your reputation gets boosted.
Michael Malice:And at no cost to yourself.
And at no cost to yourself.
Rob Henderson:Yes, all I have to do is just say a fewit's like a genie lamp. If I say a few magic words, all of a sudden, my life is tremendously enhanced. Why wouldn't I?And when these policies are implemented and when it's just sort of in the air, culturally speaking, that white privilege has to be combated, it's not going to be white Yale graduates who are going to be harmed by this idea. It's going to be poor white people, working-class white people, who are struggling to be upwardly mobile. And okay, so this institution only has a certain number of seats for white people. Well, guess who the seats are going to go to? They're going to go to the white Yale graduate, not the white kid who's struggling and trying to make his way in the world. And so as a consequence, yeah, we're combating white privilege, but really, it's harming the wrong people. It's a luxury belief increasing the status of the people explaining it and expressing it but inflicting costs on everyone else. And there's another piece of the luxury beliefs idea, which clicked for me when I arrived on campus, which is, you know, initially, my expectation was everyone would feel like they'd made it, like I felt like, you know, I struggled so hard to get there, and then once I was there, I'm like, my expectation was, no one gets a degree from a place like this and then ends up homelesslike, you're going to be okay. But whatand I expected other people to feel that way, but instead, what I saw was this intense status anxiety. Everyone was struggling for the next milestone, the next prestigious internship, getting into law school, getting into medical school, getting that high-paying job. And later, I would read research in modern empirical psychology, researchthese are replicated studieswhich find that people who are sort of at or near the top of wealth and status hierarchies are the most likely to crave wealth and status. So the way that these researchers designed this was essentially they collected objective measures of wealth and statusyour income, occupational prestige, socioeconomic status, level of wealth, and so on. And then they asked participants questions like, "Rate the extent to which you agree on a scale from one to ten"statements like, "It would please me to be in a position of power," "I enjoy having influence over others," "It's important to me that other people notice me," so on and so forth. And what these researchers findthese were two studies, one in 2020, one in 2021, replicated findingpeople who have lots of wealth and lots of status, who are doing very well in society, are the most likely to agree with those kinds of statements. They crave wealth, they crave power, they crave status, they crave recognition. And so, to some extent, it's a bit counterintuitive because you would expect the people who are at the bottom to want things like wealth and status and power, but that's not the case. It's actually people who are at the top who have this intense anxiety, this intense longing, this sort of thirst that can never be quenched. And that's what I saw, and this is what I continue to seethat people who seem to be doing very well in many areas of their life, there's always this sort of deep void within them that they're trying to fill with the next milestone, the next thing. And so they'll adopt whatever belief or whatever slogan, whatever movement they need to do in order to retain their position in society. There's almost this social status loss aversionthat now that they have it, they value it so much, and they want more of it, that they're never going to risk it. And I think this actually explains a lot of what you're seeing in terms of self-censorship across education levels. So there's a really interesting finding fromthis was from Cato and YouGovwhich found that when you ask people if they're afraid to express their political opinionsso basically the question is, "Are you afraid to express your political opinions for fear of losing your job or your employment prospects?"and they break this down by education level, they find that people with a high school diploma only are the least fearful of expressing their views. And the higher up you go, college graduates are more likely, and the people who are the most likely are people with postgraduate degreesJD, MD, PhD, these sort of advanced degrees, MBAthose are the people who 44% of them report being afraid to express their views. And I think this idea of status anxiety explains a lot of itthat they're willing to self-censor and say whatever they need to, you know, post the black square on Instagram or whatever the thing is, in order to receive the recognition that they so desire.
Yes, all I have to do is just say a fewit's like a genie lamp. If I say a few magic words, all of a sudden, my life is tremendously enhanced. Why wouldn't I?And when these policies are implemented and when it's just sort of in the air, culturally speaking, that white privilege has to be combated, it's not going to be white Yale graduates who are going to be harmed by this idea. It's going to be poor white people, working-class white people, who are struggling to be upwardly mobile. And okay, so this institution only has a certain number of seats for white people. Well, guess who the seats are going to go to? They're going to go to the white Yale graduate, not the white kid who's struggling and trying to make his way in the world. And so as a consequence, yeah, we're combating white privilege, but really, it's harming the wrong people. It's a luxury belief increasing the status of the people explaining it and expressing it but inflicting costs on everyone else. And there's another piece of the luxury beliefs idea, which clicked for me when I arrived on campus, which is, you know, initially, my expectation was everyone would feel like they'd made it, like I felt like, you know, I struggled so hard to get there, and then once I was there, I'm like, my expectation was, no one gets a degree from a place like this and then ends up homelesslike, you're going to be okay. But whatand I expected other people to feel that way, but instead, what I saw was this intense status anxiety. Everyone was struggling for the next milestone, the next prestigious internship, getting into law school, getting into medical school, getting that high-paying job. And later, I would read research in modern empirical psychology, researchthese are replicated studieswhich find that people who are sort of at or near the top of wealth and status hierarchies are the most likely to crave wealth and status. So the way that these researchers designed this was essentially they collected objective measures of wealth and statusyour income, occupational prestige, socioeconomic status, level of wealth, and so on. And then they asked participants questions like, "Rate the extent to which you agree on a scale from one to ten"statements like, "It would please me to be in a position of power," "I enjoy having influence over others," "It's important to me that other people notice me," so on and so forth. And what these researchers findthese were two studies, one in 2020, one in 2021, replicated findingpeople who have lots of wealth and lots of status, who are doing very well in society, are the most likely to agree with those kinds of statements. They crave wealth, they crave power, they crave status, they crave recognition. And so, to some extent, it's a bit counterintuitive because you would expect the people who are at the bottom to want things like wealth and status and power, but that's not the case. It's actually people who are at the top who have this intense anxiety, this intense longing, this sort of thirst that can never be quenched. And that's what I saw, and this is what I continue to seethat people who seem to be doing very well in many areas of their life, there's always this sort of deep void within them that they're trying to fill with the next milestone, the next thing. And so they'll adopt whatever belief or whatever slogan, whatever movement they need to do in order to retain their position in society. There's almost this social status loss aversionthat now that they have it, they value it so much, and they want more of it, that they're never going to risk it. And I think this actually explains a lot of what you're seeing in terms of self-censorship across education levels. So there's a really interesting finding fromthis was from Cato and YouGovwhich found that when you ask people if they're afraid to express their political opinionsso basically the question is, "Are you afraid to express your political opinions for fear of losing your job or your employment prospects?"and they break this down by education level, they find that people with a high school diploma only are the least fearful of expressing their views. And the higher up you go, college graduates are more likely, and the people who are the most likely are people with postgraduate degreesJD, MD, PhD, these sort of advanced degrees, MBAthose are the people who 44% of them report being afraid to express their views. And I think this idea of status anxiety explains a lot of itthat they're willing to self-censor and say whatever they need to, you know, post the black square on Instagram or whatever the thing is, in order to receive the recognition that they so desire.
Michael Malice:I can't express my political beliefs because I'd be kicked off of YouTube, and they'd be right to do it. Speaking of status, I just want to point out to you, to congratulate you, because you've got a book deal at such a young with a real publisher and they don't. So, you know perfectly well that for a lot of your classmates, this is driving them crazy. And you know what else? You earned it. So I want to congratulate you enormously on this book.
I can't express my political beliefs because I'd be kicked off of YouTube, and they'd be right to do it. Speaking of status, I just want to point out to you, to congratulate you, because you've got a book deal at such a young with a real publisher and they don't. So, you know perfectly well that for a lot of your classmates, this is driving them crazy. And you know what else? You earned it. So I want to congratulate you enormously on this book.
Comments
Restacks
Arif
Arif
Arif
Arif
Arif
Oct 10
I remember watching this a few months ago when at the time it was released, it was hilarious despite the nature of the conversation.
I remember watching this a few months ago when at the time it was released, it was hilarious despite the nature of the conversation.
Youre usually serious/straight to the point on podcasts so it was a great relief to see you laugh a lot during this Rob. Malice is really good at bringing that out of his guests.
Youre usually serious/straight to the point on podcasts so it was a great relief to see you laugh a lot during this Rob. Malice is really good at bringing that out of his guests.
Like (3)
Reply
Share
Green Leap Forward
Green Leap Forward
Green Leap Forward
Green Leap Forward
Green Leap Forward
Oct 10
Malice is great.
Malice is great.
Like (2)
Reply
Share
Top
Latest
Discussions

Rob Henderson

Rob Henderson

Rob Henderson

Rob Henderson

Rob Henderson

Rob Henderson

Rob Henderson

Rob Henderson

Rob Henderson

Rob Henderson


undefined subscriptions will be displayed on your profile (edit)
Skip for now
For your security, we need to re-authenticate you.
Click the link we sent to sasha.p.podolsky@gmail.com, orclick here to sign in.