

1
Book meeting
Book a meeting
A tweet for the new year. Stay focused on your goals.
Subscribed
Share
Share
Give a gift subscription
Give a gift subscription
My new lecture series The Psychology of Social Status is now available exclusively at Peterson Academy.
I delivered six lectures in front of a live studio audience, exploring the psychology of social status, examining its evolutionary roots, developmental origins, and the fundamental role it plays in shaping human behavior. We examine individual differences in status-seeking, the evolutionary reasons behind status pursuit, and the complex relationships between status, envy, emotions, and intrasexual competition for romantic partners. We also investigate the dynamics of social status in relation to stories, plot lines, and arenas of competition, and conclude by discussing the concept of luxury beliefs and their impact on society.
Enroll herefor immediate access.
for immediate access.
Heres the trailer:
Underdogs and overlords: Social status and the hero's journey.
Rob Henderson's Newsletter
Read more
On blankfacesby Scott Aaronson
by Scott Aaronson
What I Learned About Luxury at the Rolls-Royce School for Chauffeursby Hannah Elliott
by Hannah Elliott
The One Hundred Pages Strategyby Matthew Walther
by Matthew Walther
Why Fear Governs So Many of the Choices Single Young Women MakebyDaniel Cox
by
What Exactly Is Magic?byRobin Hanson
by
Always. Be. Blogging.byNate Silver
by
Follow me on Instagramhere. The platform is less volatile and more chill than Twitter/X, so I post some spicier excerpts from my readings on my IG stories
Follow me on Instagram
. The platform is less volatile and more chill than Twitter/X, so I post some spicier excerpts from my readings on my IG stories
You can follow me onTikTok here
You can follow me on
1. The more we see someone as competent, the less we see them as warm (and vice versa). As a result, people who are highly successful can seem cold and people who are warm and friendly can seem incompetent, even when theyre not. (source:The Social Paradoxby William von Hippel).
1. The more we see someone as competent, the less we see them as warm (and vice versa). As a result, people who are highly successful can seem cold and people who are warm and friendly can seem incompetent, even when theyre not. (
:
by William von Hippel).
2. People in satisfied relationships are happier, feel more positive, and more likely to state their life has meaning. The importance of romantic relationship satisfaction cannot be overstated, given that it is a major contributor to overall life satisfaction. (source).
2. People in satisfied relationships are happier, feel more positive, and more likely to state their life has meaning. The importance of romantic relationship satisfaction cannot be overstated, given that it is a major contributor to overall life satisfaction. (
).
3. When a baby is fighting an illness or infection, signals from the baby's spit enter the mothers breast, triggering her immune system to produce agents in her milk that help the baby combat the infection. (source:Eve: How the Female Body Drove 200 Million Years of Human Evolutionby Cat Bohannon).
3. When a baby is fighting an illness or infection, signals from the baby's spit enter the mothers breast, triggering her immune system to produce agents in her milk that help the baby combat the infection. (
:
by Cat Bohannon).
I spent several months compiling a list of the most interesting and impactful books Ive ever read.
The list contains my mini-reviews summarizing each book and explaining its importance.
If you are interested in getting it, just follow these two steps:
1. Order a copy of my bookTroubled: A Memoir of Foster Care, Family, and Social Classin whatever format you want (print, ebook, or audiobook)
1. Order a copy of my book
in whatever format you want (print, ebook, or audiobook)
2. Send a screenshot or photo of your receipt or proof of purchase to the email address troubledmemoir@gmail.com and use the subject line SECRET READING LIST
Already purchased a copy? Just send a screenshot of your receipt to troubledmemoir@gmail.com with the subject line SECRET READING LIST and youll get the secret reading list right away.
That's it!
And if you dont receive it within 24 hours, please check your spam/junk.
Just a note that these books werent all necessarily published this year (though some were).
Father Time: A Natural History of Men and Babiesby Sarah Blaffer Hrdy
by Sarah Blaffer Hrdy
Just as Deadly: The Psychology of Female Serial Killersby Marissa A. Harrison
by Marissa A. Harrison
Eve: How the Female Body Drove 200 Million Years of Human Evolutionby Cat Bohannon
by Cat Bohannon
This Is Your Brain on Birth Control: The Surprising Science of Women, Hormones, and the Law of Unintended Consequencesby Sarah Hill
by Sarah Hill
The Return of the Primitiveby Ayn Rand
by Ayn Rand
How Men Age: What Evolution Reveals about Male Health and Mortalityby Richard Bribiescas
by Richard Bribiescas
33 Strategies of Warby Robert Greene
by Robert Greene
The Person: A New Introduction to Personality Psychology, 6th Edition by Dan P. McAdams and William L. Dunlop
, 6th Edition by Dan P. McAdams and William L. Dunlop
The Anxious Generationby Jonathan Haidt
by Jonathan Haidt
The Hall of Uselessnessby Simon Leys
by Simon Leys
The Mind of the Artist: Personality and the Drive to Createby William Todd Schultz
by William Todd Schultz
All Art is Propaganda: Critical Essaysby George Orwell
by George Orwell
The Social Paradoxby William von Hippel
by William von Hippel
Private Equity: A Memoirby Carrie Sun
by Carrie Sun
The Best Minds: A Story of Friendship, Madness, and the Tragedy of Good Intentionsby Jonathan Rosen
by Jonathan Rosen
Hard Lessons From The Hurt Businessby Ed Latimore
by Ed Latimore
Late Admissions: Confessions of a Black Conservativeby Glenn Loury
by Glenn Loury
The Expat: A Novelby Hansen Shi
by Hansen Shi
To receive new posts and support my work, access more than100 premium archived posts, consider becoming a free or paid subscriber.
Subscribed

Comments
Restacks
Luis ngel Garca Romero
Luis ngel Garca Romero
Jan 1
Feliz Ao Nuevo, Dr. Henderson.
Feliz Ao Nuevo, Dr. Henderson.
Like (1)
Reply
Share
Majed
Majed
Jan 2
How can we get access to the lectures
How can we get access to the lectures
Like
Reply
Share
Top
Latest
Discussions

Rob Henderson

Rob Henderson

Rob Henderson

Rob Henderson

Rob Henderson

Rob Henderson

Rob Henderson

Rob Henderson

Rob Henderson

Rob Henderson


undefined subscriptions will be displayed on your profile (edit)
Skip for now
For your security, we need to re-authenticate you.
Click the link we sent to sasha.p.podolsky@gmail.com, orclick here to sign in.