

1
Book meeting
Book a meeting
I recently spoke with Richard Hanania about dating, relationships, the psychology of incels, and the sexual marketplace. Lots of great advice here, particularly for young men. Below is the transcript, lightly edited, with highlights of our conversation. Over onhis Substack, Richard has the audio and video of the podcast. Im trying to get Substack to allow my paid subscribers to get access to our gated podcast conversations that Richard hosts on his site. For now, though, Ill share these transcripts.
I recently spoke with Richard Hanania about dating, relationships, the psychology of incels, and the sexual marketplace. Lots of great advice here, particularly for young men. Below is the transcript, lightly edited, with highlights of our conversation. Over on
, Richard has the audio and video of the podcast. Im trying to get Substack to allow my paid subscribers to get access to our gated podcast conversations that Richard hosts on his site. For now, though, Ill share these transcripts.
Rob:One thought that has occurred to me about why men and maybe to some extent women, but more so men, are so frustrated about dating is because everything else in life is so easy. Every other basic need is easily satisfied. You have clean water at the flick of a switch. Foodyou tap a couple of buttons on your phone, and someone delivers you Uber Eats. Youre warm, youre sheltered, every other need is instantly and immediately met. But its just this one area of romance and sex thats still very difficult to fulfill. You still have to work for it. Youll see podcasters talking about sex and relationships, theyll interview an evolutionary psychologist. And in the comments section, there are a few guys who are like, "I cant wait for the robot GFs to arrive. Just hang on tight, boys, the robot GFs are coming." And to me, thats the mindset of, I just want Door Dash to deliver me a girlfriend. Everything else in my life is so easy to obtain. I just need this one more thing to be easy. If you want to have a relationship, if you want a girlfriend, or if you want to have sex, you are going to have to take some risks and put in the work. When it comes to intimacy and sex and those kinds of things, if you want zero risk whatsoever, then the cost is going to be you dont get a girlfriend, you dont get laid. There is no world where you can have a girlfriend and also not put in any serious effort.
One thought that has occurred to me about why men and maybe to some extent women, but more so men, are so frustrated about dating is because everything else in life is so easy. Every other basic need is easily satisfied. You have clean water at the flick of a switch. Foodyou tap a couple of buttons on your phone, and someone delivers you Uber Eats. Youre warm, youre sheltered, every other need is instantly and immediately met. But its just this one area of romance and sex thats still very difficult to fulfill. You still have to work for it. Youll see podcasters talking about sex and relationships, theyll interview an evolutionary psychologist. And in the comments section, there are a few guys who are like, "I cant wait for the robot GFs to arrive. Just hang on tight, boys, the robot GFs are coming." And to me, thats the mindset of, I just want Door Dash to deliver me a girlfriend. Everything else in my life is so easy to obtain. I just need this one more thing to be easy. If you want to have a relationship, if you want a girlfriend, or if you want to have sex, you are going to have to take some risks and put in the work. When it comes to intimacy and sex and those kinds of things, if you want zero risk whatsoever, then the cost is going to be you dont get a girlfriend, you dont get laid. There is no world where you can have a girlfriend and also not put in any serious effort.
Richard:If these guys had the perfect sex robots, they wouldnt be happy. Because they could visit prostitutes, even though its illegal. They could get a sex doll. I think what they are really angry about is the social rejection. Its the fact that nobody wants them. Nobody will sleep with them. Because, look, you could have all the porn in the world, or sex dolls today. But there are ways to get the sex, if thats your concern. But I think its the lack of sex plus the humiliation of, like, they did not choose you.
If these guys had the perfect sex robots, they wouldnt be happy. Because they could visit prostitutes, even though its illegal. They could get a sex doll. I think what they are really angry about is the social rejection. Its the fact that nobody wants them. Nobody will sleep with them. Because, look, you could have all the porn in the world, or sex dolls today. But there are ways to get the sex, if thats your concern. But I think its the lack of sex plus the humiliation of, like, they did not choose you.
Rob:Not only did you not get chosen, but women chose someone else other than you. Its one thing if she doesnt choose you and she just isnt choosing anyone at all, but she chose that other guy over you. And I think thats especially painful for a lot of bitter guys.
Not only did you not get chosen, but women chose someone else other than you. Its one thing if she doesnt choose you and she just isnt choosing anyone at all, but she chose that other guy over you. And I think thats especially painful for a lot of bitter guys.
Richard:If nobody else was having sex in the world, I think it would hurt a lot less. I want to writemaybe Ill write something once because this is a thought Ive had for a very long time. Its like the most honest feedback youre ever going to get in life as a man. You could go to people and say, "Am I a good looking guy? Am I a nice guy? Am I smart?" People will be nice and say, "Yes, anyone would be lucky to have you." Anyone is going to get that. If people feel anything for you, if they have any concern for your feelings, theyre going to do that. The one thing thats an objective test of what people actually think of your fitness as a human being, even friendships are not like that. The most objective feedback youre getting from the universe as to whether you are fit for this universe is whether women are sleeping with you.
If nobody else was having sex in the world, I think it would hurt a lot less. I want to writemaybe Ill write something once because this is a thought Ive had for a very long time. Its like the most honest feedback youre ever going to get in life as a man. You could go to people and say, "Am I a good looking guy? Am I a nice guy? Am I smart?" People will be nice and say, "Yes, anyone would be lucky to have you." Anyone is going to get that. If people feel anything for you, if they have any concern for your feelings, theyre going to do that. The one thing thats an objective test of what people actually think of your fitness as a human being, even friendships are not like that. The most objective feedback youre getting from the universe as to whether you are fit for this universe is whether women are sleeping with you.
Rob:Is that true? I guess in a Darwinian sense.
Is that true? I guess in a Darwinian sense.
Richard:Well, Im being hyperbolic. Okay. Its like whether youwhat are women looking for? Looks, money somewhat, personality, estimating how your personality appeals to other people, so social proof and things like that. And so shes taking the entire package and saying, "Come in or get out," right? Theres going to be some women who like a certain kind of guy. I mean, in my life, some women who are very pretty really liked me. And theres some women who didnt. It just doesnt click. But if youre the kind of guy who... this type of moment, the blondes or the brunettes or the blacks or the Asians or the fat or the skinny. The younger, the older, all turn you away. Thats tough to deal with. That is a psychological problem. I think the lack of sex is the least of it. I really think that this is the sexual marketplace of ideas. The sexual marketplace is the most brutal, nastiest thing we have in modern life. Its like the one vestige of caveman life. The marketplace is not a bed of roses for women either. But from the male perspective, its just so harsh.
Well, Im being hyperbolic. Okay. Its like whether youwhat are women looking for? Looks, money somewhat, personality, estimating how your personality appeals to other people, so social proof and things like that. And so shes taking the entire package and saying, "Come in or get out," right? Theres going to be some women who like a certain kind of guy. I mean, in my life, some women who are very pretty really liked me. And theres some women who didnt. It just doesnt click. But if youre the kind of guy who... this type of moment, the blondes or the brunettes or the blacks or the Asians or the fat or the skinny. The younger, the older, all turn you away. Thats tough to deal with. That is a psychological problem. I think the lack of sex is the least of it. I really think that this is the sexual marketplace of ideas. The sexual marketplace is the most brutal, nastiest thing we have in modern life. Its like the one vestige of caveman life. The marketplace is not a bed of roses for women either. But from the male perspective, its just so harsh.
Rob Henderson:Have you read this book,Very Important People: Status and Beauty in the Global Party Circuit? Tyler Cowen recommended it a couple of years ago and I read it. Its written by a sociologist named Ashley Mears. Shes an attractive sociologist who went undercover in the nightclub model world. And she describes how a group of girls will try to get into a nightclub. And the doormen are just brutally saying, "Your thighs are too fat," or whatever. Just very cold, very harsh. Some girls get in, some girls dont. And its just 100% based on how hot you are. Nothing else matters, especially in the nightclub environment. You cant even display your personality in an environment like that. It really is, are you hot or not? Now, not every social environment is a nightclub, but women do get rated far more on looks. For sexual and romantic evaluation, its different for men. Because evaluation is more superficial for women, because its mostly about appearance, at least as a woman you can say, well, we live in this very unfair world where women are judged by our looks, but I still have my personality and interests and other attributes that others dont even get to see, Im being unfairly judged but they dont even know who I really am. As a woman, you dont get feedback as a full human being. Whereas as a man, youre getting judged on everything. Were judging you to some extent on your looks, not as much as women, but a bit on your looks. But then, on your personality, your income, your job, your sense of humor, your vibe, everything else. Youre being evaluated in a more holistic way, and then were saying no, weve evaluated you as a human being, not just your appearance and your body and haircut or whateverand everything about you sucks. So rejection in some ways might be harder on men.
Have you read this book,
? Tyler Cowen recommended it a couple of years ago and I read it. Its written by a sociologist named Ashley Mears. Shes an attractive sociologist who went undercover in the nightclub model world. And she describes how a group of girls will try to get into a nightclub. And the doormen are just brutally saying, "Your thighs are too fat," or whatever. Just very cold, very harsh. Some girls get in, some girls dont. And its just 100% based on how hot you are. Nothing else matters, especially in the nightclub environment. You cant even display your personality in an environment like that. It really is, are you hot or not? Now, not every social environment is a nightclub, but women do get rated far more on looks. For sexual and romantic evaluation, its different for men. Because evaluation is more superficial for women, because its mostly about appearance, at least as a woman you can say, well, we live in this very unfair world where women are judged by our looks, but I still have my personality and interests and other attributes that others dont even get to see, Im being unfairly judged but they dont even know who I really am. As a woman, you dont get feedback as a full human being. Whereas as a man, youre getting judged on everything. Were judging you to some extent on your looks, not as much as women, but a bit on your looks. But then, on your personality, your income, your job, your sense of humor, your vibe, everything else. Youre being evaluated in a more holistic way, and then were saying no, weve evaluated you as a human being, not just your appearance and your body and haircut or whateverand everything about you sucks. So rejection in some ways might be harder on men.
Richard:Its a double-edged sword because for men, theres often hope like, yeah, I suck, but I could make more money. I could work harder. I can improve my social skills. I could do this, I could do that. At the same time, when youre rejected, maybe it is, in a sense, harsher. Youre right. The women have thisI mean, women, just everything is multiplied because the threat of violence, the threat of this evolutionary vestige of someones going to get me pregnant and then just leave me. This is all very frightening for women. At the same time, men tend to handle breakups worse. And I think it's because, for men, the kind of partner they get is very situational. A guy could just get really lucky and end up with a girl that he otherwise wouldn't be able to get, or maybe she's a level above him. And I think for women, you know, there's maybe like you might like Jeff Bezos or something, but usually, we're more replaceable for women than women are for us.
Its a double-edged sword because for men, theres often hope like, yeah, I suck, but I could make more money. I could work harder. I can improve my social skills. I could do this, I could do that. At the same time, when youre rejected, maybe it is, in a sense, harsher. Youre right. The women have thisI mean, women, just everything is multiplied because the threat of violence, the threat of this evolutionary vestige of someones going to get me pregnant and then just leave me. This is all very frightening for women. At the same time, men tend to handle breakups worse. And I think it's because, for men, the kind of partner they get is very situational. A guy could just get really lucky and end up with a girl that he otherwise wouldn't be able to get, or maybe she's a level above him. And I think for women, you know, there's maybe like you might like Jeff Bezos or something, but usually, we're more replaceable for women than women are for us.
Rob:That sounds right. Yeah. More interchangeable. And there's no sunk cost for women in the same way. Because for men, you have to go out, you have to try. And then if you lose this person you're dating, you have to go out again. You have to do the work. Whereas for women, you can kind of exist in the world. It's hard on the other end. For men, it's hard on the front end where you're going out a lot, trying to talk to girls, and it sucks getting rejected. But then once you have a girlfriend, it's fine. But for women, it's like the reverse where attracting men isn't as difficult. But after that initial attraction, it becomes hard to determine which guy is serious and which ones don't really want to stick around for the long term. It's hard in different ways. One important message for young guys is that this is true for romance, it's true for jobs, it's true for when you apply to colleges. The message is that you don't remember the rejections, and you don't dwell on them. You apply to 10 colleges, you get into one or two, and you go to college, and that's it. For your job, you send your resume out, go to interviews, and you get a job. No one remembers the interviews you went to and failed to get a job offer. No one cares. No one knows. You have your job, and that's the job you have. I think it's the same for women too. I know it's hardthe rejections are harsher than getting rejected in a job interview or from a college. But the way that memory works, you're not even going to remember those rejections. I've been rejected a lot. When I was 21, I was going out to bars five or six nights a week with my friends. I lived in this house with a bunch of my military buddies, and I would just try whatever stupid thing, say whatever in an attempt to see what might work. I don't remember any of the rejections. I think most guys don't unless you only do it once or twice. That's the weird thingthere's a paradox here where if you get rejected twice, those rejections will permanently be imprinted in your memory. But if you get rejected 200 times, you're not going to remember them. Another lesson is to just go out and get rejected more, theyll sting less.
That sounds right. Yeah. More interchangeable. And there's no sunk cost for women in the same way. Because for men, you have to go out, you have to try. And then if you lose this person you're dating, you have to go out again. You have to do the work. Whereas for women, you can kind of exist in the world. It's hard on the other end. For men, it's hard on the front end where you're going out a lot, trying to talk to girls, and it sucks getting rejected. But then once you have a girlfriend, it's fine. But for women, it's like the reverse where attracting men isn't as difficult. But after that initial attraction, it becomes hard to determine which guy is serious and which ones don't really want to stick around for the long term. It's hard in different ways. One important message for young guys is that this is true for romance, it's true for jobs, it's true for when you apply to colleges. The message is that you don't remember the rejections, and you don't dwell on them. You apply to 10 colleges, you get into one or two, and you go to college, and that's it. For your job, you send your resume out, go to interviews, and you get a job. No one remembers the interviews you went to and failed to get a job offer. No one cares. No one knows. You have your job, and that's the job you have. I think it's the same for women too. I know it's hardthe rejections are harsher than getting rejected in a job interview or from a college. But the way that memory works, you're not even going to remember those rejections. I've been rejected a lot. When I was 21, I was going out to bars five or six nights a week with my friends. I lived in this house with a bunch of my military buddies, and I would just try whatever stupid thing, say whatever in an attempt to see what might work. I don't remember any of the rejections. I think most guys don't unless you only do it once or twice. That's the weird thingthere's a paradox here where if you get rejected twice, those rejections will permanently be imprinted in your memory. But if you get rejected 200 times, you're not going to remember them. Another lesson is to just go out and get rejected more, theyll sting less.
Richard:I mean, it's like anything. It's like flying on a plane or going on a roller coaster. If you're nervous the first time, but you do it 10 times, you're not going to remember the eighth or ninth time. I think that's probably the biggest single hurdlejust believing you can change and trying. You'll never see those people again. If you're just out in publicI never went to clubs, but I would just hit on girls anywhere I went, like at university or on the shuttle between the university and UCLA, or just being out in public at the mall or whatever. It was like a full-time job. If you tweeted today, it doesn't matter. It just doesn't matter. And when you internalize that it doesn't matter, that's when you're going to succeed. The person who cares the least about the social interactionthat's appealing to people. Nobody wants to be made uncomfortable. If you're uncomfortable with yourself and the situation, and you're going out to a girl, desperately trying to get her attention or approval, she's just going to go, "Ew." But if you're just a guy who's going to say something funny and walk away or stay there or not care either way what's going to happen, people are attracted to that. I had this one article,Black Guy Hitting on Girls.I should have just said, "Be a Puerto Rican in Miami or whatever these guys are that are hitting on these chicks." It's fine to have these models of the kind of guys who just don't care.
I mean, it's like anything. It's like flying on a plane or going on a roller coaster. If you're nervous the first time, but you do it 10 times, you're not going to remember the eighth or ninth time. I think that's probably the biggest single hurdlejust believing you can change and trying. You'll never see those people again. If you're just out in publicI never went to clubs, but I would just hit on girls anywhere I went, like at university or on the shuttle between the university and UCLA, or just being out in public at the mall or whatever. It was like a full-time job. If you tweeted today, it doesn't matter. It just doesn't matter. And when you internalize that it doesn't matter, that's when you're going to succeed. The person who cares the least about the social interactionthat's appealing to people. Nobody wants to be made uncomfortable. If you're uncomfortable with yourself and the situation, and you're going out to a girl, desperately trying to get her attention or approval, she's just going to go, "Ew." But if you're just a guy who's going to say something funny and walk away or stay there or not care either way what's going to happen, people are attracted to that. I had this one article,
.
I should have just said, "Be a Puerto Rican in Miami or whatever these guys are that are hitting on these chicks." It's fine to have these models of the kind of guys who just don't care.
Rob:I wrote this post a while back.How to Be a Better Conversationalist. One of the things I noted is that a lot of guys ask how do I get better at talking to girls? But thats the wrong question. The right question is how do I get better at talking to people? If you want to talk to girls, you have to learn how to talk to human beings. Talk to your friends. Force yourself to be more social. Call your friends more often, hang out with other people more often. If the only person who will talk to you is your mom, then talk to her. Just get more comfortable at communicating and being social, not being cooped up scrolling on your phone. That's a foundational step before you move on to communicating with girls. Because if you just throw some 19-year-old kid into the fire and say, "Go talk to girls," I think that's unrealistic and probably not a great way to start. You have to be comfortable in social situations in general first.
I wrote this post a while back.
. One of the things I noted is that a lot of guys ask how do I get better at talking to girls? But thats the wrong question. The right question is how do I get better at talking to people? If you want to talk to girls, you have to learn how to talk to human beings. Talk to your friends. Force yourself to be more social. Call your friends more often, hang out with other people more often. If the only person who will talk to you is your mom, then talk to her. Just get more comfortable at communicating and being social, not being cooped up scrolling on your phone. That's a foundational step before you move on to communicating with girls. Because if you just throw some 19-year-old kid into the fire and say, "Go talk to girls," I think that's unrealistic and probably not a great way to start. You have to be comfortable in social situations in general first.
Richard:I think it's good to go along parallel tracks because you're right. When I was younger, I was focused on getting girls, and I wasn't thinking, let me talk to other people as a step towards getting girls, but it was all part of the same development pattern, the same package. One thing that you might wonder if you go into the fire, it's like when you're training for anything, right? You might throw someone into the hardest situation possible, throw them in the ocean and see if they can swim, and they won't drown. You might, psychologically. If you go out before you're ready and try to hit on a lot of girls, they can be mean. It can be very uncomfortable. There was an episode where Homer was teaching Moe how to get girls or something. And Moe goes to a girl, and she just walks away from him. And Homer's like, "I'm not going to lie to you. A lot of people saw that." That's good. It could be. But I think the key thing is to develop that thick skin. It is that mentality of "I am the black guy." It does not... it does not matter. That's just... you have to beat that. You have to keep telling yourself it doesn't matter, it doesn't matter, it doesn't matter. And when you internalize thatand it's not just that. It's not like if a guy wakes up and he's got no social skills and doesn't know how any of this works and he just has the right attitude, it's all going to work out for him. But over time, those skills can be developed. It's the attitude that has to, if not come first, then be developed alongside the blocking and tackling of social interactions.
I think it's good to go along parallel tracks because you're right. When I was younger, I was focused on getting girls, and I wasn't thinking, let me talk to other people as a step towards getting girls, but it was all part of the same development pattern, the same package. One thing that you might wonder if you go into the fire, it's like when you're training for anything, right? You might throw someone into the hardest situation possible, throw them in the ocean and see if they can swim, and they won't drown. You might, psychologically. If you go out before you're ready and try to hit on a lot of girls, they can be mean. It can be very uncomfortable. There was an episode where Homer was teaching Moe how to get girls or something. And Moe goes to a girl, and she just walks away from him. And Homer's like, "I'm not going to lie to you. A lot of people saw that." That's good. It could be. But I think the key thing is to develop that thick skin. It is that mentality of "I am the black guy." It does not... it does not matter. That's just... you have to beat that. You have to keep telling yourself it doesn't matter, it doesn't matter, it doesn't matter. And when you internalize thatand it's not just that. It's not like if a guy wakes up and he's got no social skills and doesn't know how any of this works and he just has the right attitude, it's all going to work out for him. But over time, those skills can be developed. It's the attitude that has to, if not come first, then be developed alongside the blocking and tackling of social interactions.
Rob:It takes a lot of practice too. I do feel some sympathy for young people now in this sense. Everything else in our lives, there is guidance offered, and there are preset tracks. If you want to go the education track, you want to get a good job, there is plenty of useful advice on what to do. And if you seek advice, it's normal. What should I major in in college? What should I study? What kind of job should I go for? It's normal to ask those questions. There's a lot of guidance offered, and everyone has an opinion, and no one's embarrassed to say anything about it. But when it comes to romance and sex, young people are just as much in the dark about that as career, if not more so. And it's just weird to talk about. Everyone gets prickly. There's a lot of anxiety and disagreement around it, and people get mad at you if you have an opposing opinion in a way they don't when it comes to education and career stuff. Like, "I think you should get into the best college you should get in." "Oh, no, no, no, stick with your public state school." No one gets mad about that. But when it comes to dating, you know, "You should go out and get rejected." "Oh, so you're saying people should go out and harass women?" People will just have their own hang-ups about this. No one's giving young people honest and sincere advice about this. It's kind of a novelty, I think. Evolutionarily, our hunter-gatherer ancestors didn't have to go into these strange territories and talk to women they've never seen before and try to, through sheer force of personality and charisma, win someone over. It's very evolutionary novel, unfamiliar to our psychology to do something like that, and the same for the woman too, to be approached by a strange man she's never seen before and have to interact with him in that way.
It takes a lot of practice too. I do feel some sympathy for young people now in this sense. Everything else in our lives, there is guidance offered, and there are preset tracks. If you want to go the education track, you want to get a good job, there is plenty of useful advice on what to do. And if you seek advice, it's normal. What should I major in in college? What should I study? What kind of job should I go for? It's normal to ask those questions. There's a lot of guidance offered, and everyone has an opinion, and no one's embarrassed to say anything about it. But when it comes to romance and sex, young people are just as much in the dark about that as career, if not more so. And it's just weird to talk about. Everyone gets prickly. There's a lot of anxiety and disagreement around it, and people get mad at you if you have an opposing opinion in a way they don't when it comes to education and career stuff. Like, "I think you should get into the best college you should get in." "Oh, no, no, no, stick with your public state school." No one gets mad about that. But when it comes to dating, you know, "You should go out and get rejected." "Oh, so you're saying people should go out and harass women?" People will just have their own hang-ups about this. No one's giving young people honest and sincere advice about this. It's kind of a novelty, I think. Evolutionarily, our hunter-gatherer ancestors didn't have to go into these strange territories and talk to women they've never seen before and try to, through sheer force of personality and charisma, win someone over. It's very evolutionary novel, unfamiliar to our psychology to do something like that, and the same for the woman too, to be approached by a strange man she's never seen before and have to interact with him in that way.
Richard:There was this video that went viral in recent days, and I tweeted about it too, where this woman is sitting in her car on TikTok or whatever, and she's like, "Oh, you know, my life"I think she's in her late 20s"My life has been so great. I built my career. I've worked on myself. I've been the healthiest I've ever been. But I just feel like I'm destined to be alone because I can't find anyone to share this life with." And I tweeted like, yeah, she figured out all the stuff that there's an explicit script for. There's an explicit script for how to stay healthy, how to make money, how to be educated, blah, blah, blah. But she couldn't figure out the one thing where there's no manual. There's nothing. I mean, it's like even in the 1950s, it was like, okay, you go to the girl's house, and you take her to the Nickelodeon or whatever they had in the 1950s. It was so scripted, right? And we don't have that. And it's very weird. It's like... if you have an opinion on vaccines, there's an establishment opinion on vaccines or health, and there's a sort of non-establishment thing, right? And it's like this on a lot of different topics. But on this, there is no... there's not even an establishment thing that you can react to and say this is the anti-establishment. Men are told nothing, literally nothing. Nothing explicit. You're watching a movie, and you sort of see what happens, and you're just supposed to pick it up here or there. But there's no lesson in school. There's no... the idea that you could improve on this stuffI remember when I was into the pickup artist stuff, I was scared to death somebody would see that I ordered a DVD on how to get girls. I got it, and then I took the package to my room. It was ridiculously expensive, like 200 or 300 bucks.
There was this video that went viral in recent days, and I tweeted about it too, where this woman is sitting in her car on TikTok or whatever, and she's like, "Oh, you know, my life"I think she's in her late 20s"My life has been so great. I built my career. I've worked on myself. I've been the healthiest I've ever been. But I just feel like I'm destined to be alone because I can't find anyone to share this life with." And I tweeted like, yeah, she figured out all the stuff that there's an explicit script for. There's an explicit script for how to stay healthy, how to make money, how to be educated, blah, blah, blah. But she couldn't figure out the one thing where there's no manual. There's nothing. I mean, it's like even in the 1950s, it was like, okay, you go to the girl's house, and you take her to the Nickelodeon or whatever they had in the 1950s. It was so scripted, right? And we don't have that. And it's very weird. It's like... if you have an opinion on vaccines, there's an establishment opinion on vaccines or health, and there's a sort of non-establishment thing, right? And it's like this on a lot of different topics. But on this, there is no... there's not even an establishment thing that you can react to and say this is the anti-establishment. Men are told nothing, literally nothing. Nothing explicit. You're watching a movie, and you sort of see what happens, and you're just supposed to pick it up here or there. But there's no lesson in school. There's no... the idea that you could improve on this stuffI remember when I was into the pickup artist stuff, I was scared to death somebody would see that I ordered a DVD on how to get girls. I got it, and then I took the package to my room. It was ridiculously expensive, like 200 or 300 bucks.
Rob:You went to a store and bought it or...
You went to a store and bought it or...
Richard:No, no, I got it online. It was a package. And then after I was done, I wrapped it upit came in this giant thingand I was wrapping it up and throwing it in the dumpster in my apartment like I had killed somebody. It was really embarrassing if somebody knew I was doing it. I don't know if that's changed, or just like I don't care at this point in my life. I'm not ashamed of talking about this at all. But there is a sense of, "Oh, what's wrong with you? You need to be...
No, no, I got it online. It was a package. And then after I was done, I wrapped it upit came in this giant thingand I was wrapping it up and throwing it in the dumpster in my apartment like I had killed somebody. It was really embarrassing if somebody knew I was doing it. I don't know if that's changed, or just like I don't care at this point in my life. I'm not ashamed of talking about this at all. But there is a sense of, "Oh, what's wrong with you? You need to be...
Rob:...taught this thing?" Which is weird because everything else is normal, right? Like, "I don't know about college. I don't know about this." It's like, "Oh, sorry, here, let's give you a hand. We understand it's not fair that you don't know this information, so we're going to make it accessible for you." There is that kind of egalitarian impulse for these other things, but then with the sexual realm, it's very much freewheeling, like youre on your own with this. [NB: I find it extraordinary that people would judge a young guy for spending 200 dollars on lessons to improve his romantic prospects, but no one would bat an eye if he spent 200 dollars for lessons on how to improve his educational or employment prospects]. Its a capitalist dream. Some guys draw the analogy of the deregulation of the sexual marketplace, right? Where we used to essentially have a kind of sexual communism, sexual socialism, whatevereveryone gets a spouse. Romantic resources are, they're evenly divided. And then the marketplace was deregulated. And now it's completely freewheeling, no guidelines, no scripts, nothing. Everyone can kind of do their own thing. And this kind of liberation has created a lot of issues, but the same people who get upset about economic inequality have nothing to say about sexual inequality. And even if you make that connection explicitdidn't Robin Hanson get in trouble for that a few years ago? I think he tried to draw this comparison about, like, why is it that we care about economic inequality but not sexual inequality? And people basically accused him of supporting rape or something. Meanwhile, the people who are mad about sexual inequality are probably more likely to support free market capitalist economic systems. That contradiction is interesting.
...taught this thing?" Which is weird because everything else is normal, right? Like, "I don't know about college. I don't know about this." It's like, "Oh, sorry, here, let's give you a hand. We understand it's not fair that you don't know this information, so we're going to make it accessible for you." There is that kind of egalitarian impulse for these other things, but then with the sexual realm, it's very much freewheeling, like youre on your own with this. [NB: I find it extraordinary that people would judge a young guy for spending 200 dollars on lessons to improve his romantic prospects, but no one would bat an eye if he spent 200 dollars for lessons on how to improve his educational or employment prospects]. Its a capitalist dream. Some guys draw the analogy of the deregulation of the sexual marketplace, right? Where we used to essentially have a kind of sexual communism, sexual socialism, whatevereveryone gets a spouse. Romantic resources are, they're evenly divided. And then the marketplace was deregulated. And now it's completely freewheeling, no guidelines, no scripts, nothing. Everyone can kind of do their own thing. And this kind of liberation has created a lot of issues, but the same people who get upset about economic inequality have nothing to say about sexual inequality. And even if you make that connection explicitdidn't Robin Hanson get in trouble for that a few years ago? I think he tried to draw this comparison about, like, why is it that we care about economic inequality but not sexual inequality? And people basically accused him of supporting rape or something. Meanwhile, the people who are mad about sexual inequality are probably more likely to support free market capitalist economic systems. That contradiction is interesting.
Richard:The Groyper types, it's becoming more congruent. They're mad about sexual inequality, and some of them hate free markets too. I think on the right, you find people who want basically socialism for white people. They want mercantilism and tariffs and social security and all this other stuff too. But within the right, there is a consistent libertypro-libertyyeah, I guess both these pure types exist on the right, right? You have the sort of pure liberty people who are libertarians on everything, and then you have theit's not as powerful, but powerful onlinethe socialists in economics and the socialists in the sexual marketplace.
The Groyper types, it's becoming more congruent. They're mad about sexual inequality, and some of them hate free markets too. I think on the right, you find people who want basically socialism for white people. They want mercantilism and tariffs and social security and all this other stuff too. But within the right, there is a consistent libertypro-libertyyeah, I guess both these pure types exist on the right, right? You have the sort of pure liberty people who are libertarians on everything, and then you have theit's not as powerful, but powerful onlinethe socialists in economics and the socialists in the sexual marketplace.
Rob:I was 22 when Tinder took off. So I'd already been going out for like a year, a year or two. Tinder didn't really become prominent in the culture until 2014. So I was 24 by that point. So I kind of overlapped with it a little bit. But I remember the before times, going out to bars. I was able to go to bars beforehand because if you had a military ID, a lot of bars would just let you in. So I was 17, 18 years old going to bars. So I remember before and after. But it seems like there was this period where everyone loved the apps for a while. It was this hopeful innovation. And now I think a lot of young people are turning away from them. I think for the average guy, the apps are probably a bad deal. I've seen among my friends and among guys I know firsthand, just like the deregulated sexual marketplace is already unfair. Now, if you're a good-looking, successful guy, you're just going to get more attention. But on the apps, it amplifies it even more so where even if you were a good-looking guy 15 years ago, you couldn't line up six dates in one day. Whereas now, if you're a good-looking, successful guy, you can have sex with five or six girls in one day if you want, just because of the apps.
I was 22 when Tinder took off. So I'd already been going out for like a year, a year or two. Tinder didn't really become prominent in the culture until 2014. So I was 24 by that point. So I kind of overlapped with it a little bit. But I remember the before times, going out to bars. I was able to go to bars beforehand because if you had a military ID, a lot of bars would just let you in. So I was 17, 18 years old going to bars. So I remember before and after. But it seems like there was this period where everyone loved the apps for a while. It was this hopeful innovation. And now I think a lot of young people are turning away from them. I think for the average guy, the apps are probably a bad deal. I've seen among my friends and among guys I know firsthand, just like the deregulated sexual marketplace is already unfair. Now, if you're a good-looking, successful guy, you're just going to get more attention. But on the apps, it amplifies it even more so where even if you were a good-looking guy 15 years ago, you couldn't line up six dates in one day. Whereas now, if you're a good-looking, successful guy, you can have sex with five or six girls in one day if you want, just because of the apps.
Richard:I remember the early days of the apps. I remember it was like, I think a lot of guys took it like, oh wait, there's a limited amount of women. One of them will like me. And then they get on and they send thousands of messages. Yeah, this is brutal. I think people understandI think this is the black pilling of the youth. A lot of young people, a lot of incel types, have the belief that looks are all that matter for men. And I think they've been warped by the dating apps where that's all the women have to go off of, is the way you look. If you're approaching them in real life, women, when they say someone's cute, it doesn't always mean they're physically cute. I've seen women say cute to a guy nobody would think is cute. It just means that I like him generally. Even studies show that when they show a woman a picture and they say he's a doctor versus he's a street sweeper, they find the doctor more attractive. And that's just one thing, right? It's not personality or anything like that, but it's profession, it's status. And so, yeah, I mean, the dating apps... But, you know, you're not a prisoner. You can still approach people in real life. You're allowed to do that. You're not going to get arrested. The cops are not going to come after you. It may be a little weird, but at the same time, if it happens less often, you're at a comparative advantage because you're the only person who talked to this girl in a week or something. And so, yeah, I don't think it's necessarily that much harder for somebody. It just requires less conformity. If you are dominated by norms of what you're supposed to do, things are a lot harder. But there's a lot of opportunities if you're not.
I remember the early days of the apps. I remember it was like, I think a lot of guys took it like, oh wait, there's a limited amount of women. One of them will like me. And then they get on and they send thousands of messages. Yeah, this is brutal. I think people understandI think this is the black pilling of the youth. A lot of young people, a lot of incel types, have the belief that looks are all that matter for men. And I think they've been warped by the dating apps where that's all the women have to go off of, is the way you look. If you're approaching them in real life, women, when they say someone's cute, it doesn't always mean they're physically cute. I've seen women say cute to a guy nobody would think is cute. It just means that I like him generally. Even studies show that when they show a woman a picture and they say he's a doctor versus he's a street sweeper, they find the doctor more attractive. And that's just one thing, right? It's not personality or anything like that, but it's profession, it's status. And so, yeah, I mean, the dating apps... But, you know, you're not a prisoner. You can still approach people in real life. You're allowed to do that. You're not going to get arrested. The cops are not going to come after you. It may be a little weird, but at the same time, if it happens less often, you're at a comparative advantage because you're the only person who talked to this girl in a week or something. And so, yeah, I don't think it's necessarily that much harder for somebody. It just requires less conformity. If you are dominated by norms of what you're supposed to do, things are a lot harder. But there's a lot of opportunities if you're not.
Rob:I don't want to rule out the apps entirely. I mean, it's probably been a bad decade or so with the apps in terms of their effect on dating and everything, but they're still out there. People still use them. But if you're a guy and you're dead set on using them, you should just take them more seriously. So many guys put in this very half-hearted effort where they'll take some crappy selfie or an old photo from three years ago and put it up there, maybe put one line in the bio. But if you really are intent on meeting someone and you're serious about it, it is worth investing. Get a professional photographer. Get a few good photos. If you have an interesting hobby or an interesting job, put those pictures up. I remember one of my readers, I had a meeting with him a while back, and he's a doctor, a physician. And he was telling me, "Oh yeah, I'm not having any luck on the apps." And I was like, "You're a doctor. You should be getting some interest. Women like doctors." And I asked, "Do you have your occupation in your bio, do you have a photo of yourself in a white doctors coat?" And he's like, "No, I don't want to make women think that I'm trying hard to impress them or something." And I'm like, "Dude, how are you going to stand out among the sea of men who are trying to get her attention? You've got to hire a professional photographer to follow you into the hospital while you're in a lab coat. You've got to stand out. Even if you're not great-looking, again, if you have an interesting hobby or an interesting job and you can get some interesting photos of yourself, that's great. But then, in the in-person thing, you can talk to strangers, I guess. But none of these things are mutually exclusive. You can do all of them if you wantthe apps, in person, and strangersbut also just be in social settings. One of my friends that I grew up with, he's like an okay-looking guy, not super attractive. But he worked at Walmartnot a great jobbut he was also a part-time swimming coach. And some girl who was at the pool that day saw him, and they started talking, and she saw him in that position of being in a leadership instructor position, not as a guy at Walmart. And so he had an interesting part-time hobby. I don't think he necessarily intended to meet this girl, but you can find ways to be in social settings where you are able to display talent and skill and meet girls that way, too.
I don't want to rule out the apps entirely. I mean, it's probably been a bad decade or so with the apps in terms of their effect on dating and everything, but they're still out there. People still use them. But if you're a guy and you're dead set on using them, you should just take them more seriously. So many guys put in this very half-hearted effort where they'll take some crappy selfie or an old photo from three years ago and put it up there, maybe put one line in the bio. But if you really are intent on meeting someone and you're serious about it, it is worth investing. Get a professional photographer. Get a few good photos. If you have an interesting hobby or an interesting job, put those pictures up. I remember one of my readers, I had a meeting with him a while back, and he's a doctor, a physician. And he was telling me, "Oh yeah, I'm not having any luck on the apps." And I was like, "You're a doctor. You should be getting some interest. Women like doctors." And I asked, "Do you have your occupation in your bio, do you have a photo of yourself in a white doctors coat?" And he's like, "No, I don't want to make women think that I'm trying hard to impress them or something." And I'm like, "Dude, how are you going to stand out among the sea of men who are trying to get her attention? You've got to hire a professional photographer to follow you into the hospital while you're in a lab coat. You've got to stand out. Even if you're not great-looking, again, if you have an interesting hobby or an interesting job and you can get some interesting photos of yourself, that's great. But then, in the in-person thing, you can talk to strangers, I guess. But none of these things are mutually exclusive. You can do all of them if you wantthe apps, in person, and strangersbut also just be in social settings. One of my friends that I grew up with, he's like an okay-looking guy, not super attractive. But he worked at Walmartnot a great jobbut he was also a part-time swimming coach. And some girl who was at the pool that day saw him, and they started talking, and she saw him in that position of being in a leadership instructor position, not as a guy at Walmart. And so he had an interesting part-time hobby. I don't think he necessarily intended to meet this girl, but you can find ways to be in social settings where you are able to display talent and skill and meet girls that way, too.
Richard:Yeah. That's right. I mean, I neverthe apps, I tried them for a little while. I never had any luck, but I was very good at real life. And I think I need that personality thing to come through. But other people might have better luck with them. You're right on the social thing. This is why you might be thinking when you decide what to do with your life, you might think work from home is the best option for making money and convenience. But this is why people move to cities, right? This is why, you know, you just need to see a lot of people. You know, serendipity happens. People should watch the oldSex and the Cityepisodes to see how many people they run into on a daily basis. I don't know if it's the best lesson in life fromSex and the City,but it gives you a sense of what its like to live in a big city and always be running into people. You're in an apartment. Someone is next door to you. Someone is above you. Someone is below you. There's a doorman. There's a person at the store. There are people at the cafe, at the restaurant, just when you're walking down the streetthe streets are crowded. It is a numbers game.
Yeah. That's right. I mean, I neverthe apps, I tried them for a little while. I never had any luck, but I was very good at real life. And I think I need that personality thing to come through. But other people might have better luck with them. You're right on the social thing. This is why you might be thinking when you decide what to do with your life, you might think work from home is the best option for making money and convenience. But this is why people move to cities, right? This is why, you know, you just need to see a lot of people. You know, serendipity happens. People should watch the old
episodes to see how many people they run into on a daily basis. I don't know if it's the best lesson in life from
but it gives you a sense of what its like to live in a big city and always be running into people. You're in an apartment. Someone is next door to you. Someone is above you. Someone is below you. There's a doorman. There's a person at the store. There are people at the cafe, at the restaurant, just when you're walking down the streetthe streets are crowded. It is a numbers game.
It is a numbers game where you don't need to meet dozens of women who all fall in love with you. You just have to find somebody who is compatible with you for the long run. That's why colleges are great too because they take people and put them in the same place, and they're living close by, and they just run into each other, have these serendipitous encounters. So yeah, that's another piece of advicejust be places where...
Rob:there are other human beings. Yeah. I think on the college point, people, young people aren't aware of this. And I've had this conversation now with multiple recent college grads where they're shocked when they get out into the real world and realize, "Oh, when you go from college to your first job, you're working with old people. You're working with people who are not in your age group, who have none of the same interests as you." Trying to find a social circlenot just romantic partners, but friends and people to hang out withcan be very difficult. You go your whole life essentially from age five to 22 or 23, and you're always around people in your cohort, people who are roughly the same age as you, who naturally are at the same stage of life and have overlapping interests. So it's easy to make friends, and then it's easy to find someone to date. Then you're 23, and you go off to your first job, and it's like, "Oh, you don't know anyone. No one's in the same age bracket as you." It is worth using that time in college to seriously find someone who you're compatible with and to form a long-term relationship with. If you know in advance thats what you want to do, recognize that once the college experience ends, it's going to be way, way harder to find someone in that serendipitous, fun atmosphere ever again. And honestly, I've heard a lot of peoplethis is why they end up going to get an MBA or go to law school or whateverbecause they just miss school, but they specifically miss the social element of school where you're around people roughly the same age. [more on this pointhere]
there are other human beings. Yeah. I think on the college point, people, young people aren't aware of this. And I've had this conversation now with multiple recent college grads where they're shocked when they get out into the real world and realize, "Oh, when you go from college to your first job, you're working with old people. You're working with people who are not in your age group, who have none of the same interests as you." Trying to find a social circlenot just romantic partners, but friends and people to hang out withcan be very difficult. You go your whole life essentially from age five to 22 or 23, and you're always around people in your cohort, people who are roughly the same age as you, who naturally are at the same stage of life and have overlapping interests. So it's easy to make friends, and then it's easy to find someone to date. Then you're 23, and you go off to your first job, and it's like, "Oh, you don't know anyone. No one's in the same age bracket as you." It is worth using that time in college to seriously find someone who you're compatible with and to form a long-term relationship with. If you know in advance thats what you want to do, recognize that once the college experience ends, it's going to be way, way harder to find someone in that serendipitous, fun atmosphere ever again. And honestly, I've heard a lot of peoplethis is why they end up going to get an MBA or go to law school or whateverbecause they just miss school, but they specifically miss the social element of school where you're around people roughly the same age. [more on this point
]
Richard:Yeah. That's a good point. I was sort of lucky in this regard because I did so much graduate school, and that wasn't the reason why, but there were a lot of opportunities. Twelve years in college and stuff, because I went to law school and graduate school instead of four years. You're right. What did people do back in the day? They married their college sweetheart, right? I don't know. That's fallen out of favor. Maybe not for the lower classes, but the upper classes expect to be mobile and go where the world takes them. So, just not finding a girlfriend in college and then taking a programming job in suburban Omaha or something because the cost of living is low, and expecting to meet someone in that case is going to be hard. You've lost your opportunity by then. But yes, people, young men who are listening to this, if you're 18, 19, when you're young, you think everything lasts forever. No, your best opportunity is now. It's 18, 19, 20, 21. You have time. In college, most people are not doing much of anything. They're just wasting away. So you have time, but you don't have time to waste those years. But you do have the time to go out and find somebody.
Yeah. That's a good point. I was sort of lucky in this regard because I did so much graduate school, and that wasn't the reason why, but there were a lot of opportunities. Twelve years in college and stuff, because I went to law school and graduate school instead of four years. You're right. What did people do back in the day? They married their college sweetheart, right? I don't know. That's fallen out of favor. Maybe not for the lower classes, but the upper classes expect to be mobile and go where the world takes them. So, just not finding a girlfriend in college and then taking a programming job in suburban Omaha or something because the cost of living is low, and expecting to meet someone in that case is going to be hard. You've lost your opportunity by then. But yes, people, young men who are listening to this, if you're 18, 19, when you're young, you think everything lasts forever. No, your best opportunity is now. It's 18, 19, 20, 21. You have time. In college, most people are not doing much of anything. They're just wasting away. So you have time, but you don't have time to waste those years. But you do have the time to go out and find somebody.
Rob:What do you think of this line that a lot of the red pill guys say that, "Oh, you should just spend your teens and twenties making money and stacking paper, and then your sexual peak isn't until you're 35 and a half years old?"
What do you think of this line that a lot of the red pill guys say that, "Oh, you should just spend your teens and twenties making money and stacking paper, and then your sexual peak isn't until you're 35 and a half years old?"
Richard:Look, if you have a chance of being a billionaire, if you have a company thatsyou know, if you have an ideaif you're Mark Zuckerberg, yeah, you should build Facebook. But if you think you're going to stack 300K a year and the women are just going to be running to you without doing anything else, no, that's not going to happen. That's bad. That's not good advice. Maybe if you want partners who are likeyou want to really impress dumb waitresses or somethingmaybe its going to be, yeah, it's not a complete waste of time. I'll say alternatively, here's another thing to think about, and I didn't think about this when I went to graduate school too much. If you have no money and you're 21, it's okay. Nobody has money, and you have some upside. It's like getting a draft pick, like you play a bunch of sports. Youre just a draft pick; you have potential. But if you're 30 and you went to get your PhD in philosophy or somethingevery philosophy pays decent, but I don't know, anthropology or sociology or somethingand then you don't have any money and you're 30 or 35, you don't want to be in that situation. You want at least enough money where you're earning like an adult. You definitely don't want to think you could be poor and be okay with women for the long run.
Look, if you have a chance of being a billionaire, if you have a company thatsyou know, if you have an ideaif you're Mark Zuckerberg, yeah, you should build Facebook. But if you think you're going to stack 300K a year and the women are just going to be running to you without doing anything else, no, that's not going to happen. That's bad. That's not good advice. Maybe if you want partners who are likeyou want to really impress dumb waitresses or somethingmaybe its going to be, yeah, it's not a complete waste of time. I'll say alternatively, here's another thing to think about, and I didn't think about this when I went to graduate school too much. If you have no money and you're 21, it's okay. Nobody has money, and you have some upside. It's like getting a draft pick, like you play a bunch of sports. Youre just a draft pick; you have potential. But if you're 30 and you went to get your PhD in philosophy or somethingevery philosophy pays decent, but I don't know, anthropology or sociology or somethingand then you don't have any money and you're 30 or 35, you don't want to be in that situation. You want at least enough money where you're earning like an adult. You definitely don't want to think you could be poor and be okay with women for the long run.
Rob:That strikes me as right. I'm not sold that when you're 30-something, you're necessarily more attractive to women than when you're 22 or 23. You know, it's possible, but I don't think the average guy is actually a more attractive partner.
That strikes me as right. I'm not sold that when you're 30-something, you're necessarily more attractive to women than when you're 22 or 23. You know, it's possible, but I don't think the average guy is actually a more attractive partner.
Richard:All else being equal, a 20-year-old would rather have someone closer to her in age.
All else being equal, a 20-year-old would rather have someone closer to her in age.
Rob:Yeah, right. And like, yeah, okay, when you're 35, you're almost certainly going to be making more money than when you're 25. But it's not that commonthose kinds of wide age gaps aren't that common. And there was that really nice post from Scott Alexander who did a nice summary of the assortative mating patterns. Most people actually do sort of marry people in the same education bracket, socioeconomic bracket, and so on. So, yeah, I think these guys"Oh, if you're 34 and make a lot of money, you'll marry some hot 19-year-old waitress"but in the real world, that doesn't actually happen that much, if at all. And I don't even personally know any stories like that. I know stories of very short-term, like, one-night stands where things like that happen, but I don't know anyone who actually lands the proverbial hot 19-year-old waitress when they're 35 and they get married.
Yeah, right. And like, yeah, okay, when you're 35, you're almost certainly going to be making more money than when you're 25. But it's not that commonthose kinds of wide age gaps aren't that common. And there was that really nice post from Scott Alexander who did a nice summary of the assortative mating patterns. Most people actually do sort of marry people in the same education bracket, socioeconomic bracket, and so on. So, yeah, I think these guys"Oh, if you're 34 and make a lot of money, you'll marry some hot 19-year-old waitress"but in the real world, that doesn't actually happen that much, if at all. And I don't even personally know any stories like that. I know stories of very short-term, like, one-night stands where things like that happen, but I don't know anyone who actually lands the proverbial hot 19-year-old waitress when they're 35 and they get married.
Richard:The guys who I know are 35 or 40 and single and who earn decent moneythey're not the kind of guys who want to marry a dumb 19-year-old. Usually, people go for somebody who they have something in common with, who will provide good, you know, high IQ genes to their children, who is sort of in the same class bracket. So, I mean, I don't know, like if that was your goalif you make, you know, a couple hundred thousand a year and you just wanted to marry an 18-year-oldjust what, how would you meet waitresses? I dont know. You just go to different restaurants? You just go eat meals alone everywhere until you find a waitress who goes out with you? I think thats not the craziest idea. Like that could work. I dont know. That could work if that was your goal. But that would be a strange goal, actually, because you just want, you know, a dumb 19-year-old... I dont know. People also want, in a long-term partner, more than just looks. And, by the way, a lot of low-crust waitresses are really fat and ugly and full of tattoos. Like, this idea of mythical, hot waitressesmaybe in, like, 1975.
The guys who I know are 35 or 40 and single and who earn decent moneythey're not the kind of guys who want to marry a dumb 19-year-old. Usually, people go for somebody who they have something in common with, who will provide good, you know, high IQ genes to their children, who is sort of in the same class bracket. So, I mean, I don't know, like if that was your goalif you make, you know, a couple hundred thousand a year and you just wanted to marry an 18-year-oldjust what, how would you meet waitresses? I dont know. You just go to different restaurants? You just go eat meals alone everywhere until you find a waitress who goes out with you? I think thats not the craziest idea. Like that could work. I dont know. That could work if that was your goal. But that would be a strange goal, actually, because you just want, you know, a dumb 19-year-old... I dont know. People also want, in a long-term partner, more than just looks. And, by the way, a lot of low-crust waitresses are really fat and ugly and full of tattoos. Like, this idea of mythical, hot waitressesmaybe in, like, 1975.
Rob:Well, yeah. Okay. Well, what are we thinking here? Because, like... if you go to L.A.well, you're in L.A.there are hot waitresses, the aspiring actresses.
Well, yeah. Okay. Well, what are we thinking here? Because, like... if you go to L.A.well, you're in L.A.there are hot waitresses, the aspiring actresses.
Richard:Yeah, but they're aspiring. The hottest waitresses are probably at the most expensive restaurants. Theyre competing with ballers. Its going to be hard to get enough stacks to break into that bracket.
Yeah, but they're aspiring. The hottest waitresses are probably at the most expensive restaurants. Theyre competing with ballers. Its going to be hard to get enough stacks to break into that bracket.
Rob:I mean, major cities. If you go to New York, even mid-tier restaurants, there are attractive servers and restaurant staff. But even then, I dont know. I know New York finance guys, and they dont date people who work in restaurants. Thats just not something that happens.
I mean, major cities. If you go to New York, even mid-tier restaurants, there are attractive servers and restaurant staff. But even then, I dont know. I know New York finance guys, and they dont date people who work in restaurants. Thats just not something that happens.
Richard:Who do your finance friends date?
Who do your finance friends date?
Rob:Like other people in finance or in their broad occupational category, one of my friends is in finance, and his girlfriends in law school, and wherever she ends up, at a law firm or whatever, its not going to be at a restaurant. Thats just kind of who they end up datingpeople in finance, consulting, or elite media, right? Like journalists or artists or some creative type, high-status, low-pay kind of job.
Like other people in finance or in their broad occupational category, one of my friends is in finance, and his girlfriends in law school, and wherever she ends up, at a law firm or whatever, its not going to be at a restaurant. Thats just kind of who they end up datingpeople in finance, consulting, or elite media, right? Like journalists or artists or some creative type, high-status, low-pay kind of job.
Richard:Yeah, I mean, maybe you should just take that money you stacked and open a restaurant, and then you'd have access to it. You could hire the hottest hostesses. That happens.
Yeah, I mean, maybe you should just take that money you stacked and open a restaurant, and then you'd have access to it. You could hire the hottest hostesses. That happens.
Rob:Thats actually a thing that does happen. This is like a common trope of the Applebee's manager just having sex with the waitresses. If you run the schedules and the itineraries, youre the local kingpin.
Thats actually a thing that does happen. This is like a common trope of the Applebee's manager just having sex with the waitresses. If you run the schedules and the itineraries, youre the local kingpin.
Richard:Why are we using restaurants? Is that the kind of job where you have a lot of employees, and a lot of them will be women? Are there a lot of other jobs like that too? You could be a... I think thats right. I think hostesses are selected on looks. So go manage an Amazon warehouse and then try to get the women. Probably not that many women workers.
Why are we using restaurants? Is that the kind of job where you have a lot of employees, and a lot of them will be women? Are there a lot of other jobs like that too? You could be a... I think thats right. I think hostesses are selected on looks. So go manage an Amazon warehouse and then try to get the women. Probably not that many women workers.
Rob:Yeah, not an Amazon warehouse. Yeah, it would have to be maybe a coffee shop, cafe. Because restaurantsservers have soft skills, just being sort of chipper and perky and happy, emotional labor, right, like those kinds of jobs. Whereas, yeah, if youre a foreman at a factory or running some other kind of organization
Yeah, not an Amazon warehouse. Yeah, it would have to be maybe a coffee shop, cafe. Because restaurantsservers have soft skills, just being sort of chipper and perky and happy, emotional labor, right, like those kinds of jobs. Whereas, yeah, if youre a foreman at a factory or running some other kind of organization
Richard:Yeah, thats why college, high schoolthese are the key moments of your life where you're going to have the best odds of... I think people dont getwhen you see it as a probability game, you take it less personally. When you've had some experience, you say it worked out with this person, it didnt work out with that person. I think that if you've never been with a girl or never had a girlfriend or whatever, its easy to fall into the funk of, "Im just hopeless, and nobody will ever like me," which might be true for some people. But for a lot of people, it's just like, if you had five times the social interactions, you would have had three girlfriends instead of zero in your life.
Yeah, thats why college, high schoolthese are the key moments of your life where you're going to have the best odds of... I think people dont getwhen you see it as a probability game, you take it less personally. When you've had some experience, you say it worked out with this person, it didnt work out with that person. I think that if you've never been with a girl or never had a girlfriend or whatever, its easy to fall into the funk of, "Im just hopeless, and nobody will ever like me," which might be true for some people. But for a lot of people, it's just like, if you had five times the social interactions, you would have had three girlfriends instead of zero in your life.
Rob:If you're fat, lose weight. And if you dress like shit, figure out your style, get clothes that fit, go into some mid-scale or upscale store if you can afford it, get a stylist or whatever. Ask the female staff at a store, ask a woman there to help you pick out some clothes. Or, if you have a female friend, get a womans opinion on how you should be dressing. Get some nice shoes that fit, take care of your grooming and hygiene. So many guys have disgusting beards, and theyre not well-kept and well-groomed, they dont get haircuts regularly, they dont comb their hair. This is very basic stuff. And weirdly, this is one of the things I learned when I was in the Air Force. A lot of guys just dont learn basic hygiene and personal grooming. Weirdly, the military teaches you about haircuts and grooming and hygiene and shaving and all that stuff. The reason theyre so adamant and strict about this is because a lot of young guys just either never learned or wont keep up on it on their own unless theyre forced to. So why would a woman want to talk to you? Try to look as best as you can given your genes and limitationstry to reach the uppermost limitation of whatever your genetic ceiling is. And thatll put you in a better position for people to be open to speaking with you.
If you're fat, lose weight. And if you dress like shit, figure out your style, get clothes that fit, go into some mid-scale or upscale store if you can afford it, get a stylist or whatever. Ask the female staff at a store, ask a woman there to help you pick out some clothes. Or, if you have a female friend, get a womans opinion on how you should be dressing. Get some nice shoes that fit, take care of your grooming and hygiene. So many guys have disgusting beards, and theyre not well-kept and well-groomed, they dont get haircuts regularly, they dont comb their hair. This is very basic stuff. And weirdly, this is one of the things I learned when I was in the Air Force. A lot of guys just dont learn basic hygiene and personal grooming. Weirdly, the military teaches you about haircuts and grooming and hygiene and shaving and all that stuff. The reason theyre so adamant and strict about this is because a lot of young guys just either never learned or wont keep up on it on their own unless theyre forced to. So why would a woman want to talk to you? Try to look as best as you can given your genes and limitationstry to reach the uppermost limitation of whatever your genetic ceiling is. And thatll put you in a better position for people to be open to speaking with you.
Richard:Looks maxing. Yeah. I thought you were going in a different direction.
Looks maxing. Yeah. I thought you were going in a different direction.
Rob:What direction did you think?
What direction did you think?
Richard:I thought when you said, "Be the kind of person people want to talk to," you werent going to talk about looks, although that is right. Theres also just like accomplishing things in life.
I thought when you said, "Be the kind of person people want to talk to," you werent going to talk about looks, although that is right. Theres also just like accomplishing things in life.
Rob:Right.
Right.
Richard:Like a little bit of fame. There was this one Twitter e-celebrity, a mini-celebrity, like 10,000 or 20,000 followersa girl who occasionally pops up in my timelineand she talks about how she went on a date with some rando who reached out to her on Twitter. So something like, do something in life. Becoming a little bit of a celebrity, writing articles, writing op-eds, being on Twitter, getting some attention, starting a podcast. If you have an interestright? We write about politics and social issues, and probably most of our readers are male, but we have a lot of female Twitter followers just because we have a lot of Twitter followers, even if they're not the majority. Just having a little bit of prominence, just giving people a reason to know you. It doesnt necessarily have to be fame, but you could be the best yoga instructor, Scrabble playerI dont know what the hell normal people dobut doing something in your life. Dont just sit there and watch TV or scroll on your phone.
Like a little bit of fame. There was this one Twitter e-celebrity, a mini-celebrity, like 10,000 or 20,000 followersa girl who occasionally pops up in my timelineand she talks about how she went on a date with some rando who reached out to her on Twitter. So something like, do something in life. Becoming a little bit of a celebrity, writing articles, writing op-eds, being on Twitter, getting some attention, starting a podcast. If you have an interestright? We write about politics and social issues, and probably most of our readers are male, but we have a lot of female Twitter followers just because we have a lot of Twitter followers, even if they're not the majority. Just having a little bit of prominence, just giving people a reason to know you. It doesnt necessarily have to be fame, but you could be the best yoga instructor, Scrabble playerI dont know what the hell normal people dobut doing something in your life. Dont just sit there and watch TV or scroll on your phone.
Rob:Have some hobbies. And hobbies that are... whether you share photos of yourself teaching a yoga class, a sport, or if you play an instrument, or whatever it happens to bejust have ways to make that accessible and easily visible to people. Thats just the world we live in now. Even if you meet a girl in person, in your class or at work or in a completely random social setting, if you exchange contact info, shes going to check out your socials and see what you do, what kind of person you are. Be the kind of person someone would want to talk to. Whether it's some kind of niche micro-fame or interesting hobbysomething that elicits interest. So yeah, both of those thingslooks maxing and trying to be an interesting person as well. Dont just coop yourself up and be a weird shut-in playing video games. Richard, how often do guys ask you for dating advice?
Have some hobbies. And hobbies that are... whether you share photos of yourself teaching a yoga class, a sport, or if you play an instrument, or whatever it happens to bejust have ways to make that accessible and easily visible to people. Thats just the world we live in now. Even if you meet a girl in person, in your class or at work or in a completely random social setting, if you exchange contact info, shes going to check out your socials and see what you do, what kind of person you are. Be the kind of person someone would want to talk to. Whether it's some kind of niche micro-fame or interesting hobbysomething that elicits interest. So yeah, both of those thingslooks maxing and trying to be an interesting person as well. Dont just coop yourself up and be a weird shut-in playing video games. Richard, how often do guys ask you for dating advice?
Richard:It happens on occasion.
It happens on occasion.
Rob:Its not uncommon for guys to ask me.
Its not uncommon for guys to ask me.
Richard:Yeah, same here. I think theres a big audience for this stuff. People need it. I dont even know what the Red Pill guys are doing today. From my impression, which is mostly from talking to Farha and Jasmine a couple of weeks ago, is that Red Pill guys are just teaching men to be bitter incels who hate women. I dont know if theres any more... I guess it's like a person like Jordan Peterson or something. Hes old, so hes not going to give you practical advice for picking up chicks, but hes going to tell you to clean your room or whatever. So yeah, I dont know if this must exist somewhere, but I think theres probably a dearth of good material out there.
Yeah, same here. I think theres a big audience for this stuff. People need it. I dont even know what the Red Pill guys are doing today. From my impression, which is mostly from talking to Farha and Jasmine a couple of weeks ago, is that Red Pill guys are just teaching men to be bitter incels who hate women. I dont know if theres any more... I guess it's like a person like Jordan Peterson or something. Hes old, so hes not going to give you practical advice for picking up chicks, but hes going to tell you to clean your room or whatever. So yeah, I dont know if this must exist somewhere, but I think theres probably a dearth of good material out there.
Rob:I watched a few of Andrew Tates videos. But some of his stuff, its not off-base. So much of it is embellished and weird and crazy, but the underlying message of "be irrationally bold and confident"its probably bad to be more confident than you should be, but it's far better than being under confident. Err on the side of boldness, of courage. Its better to give yourselfan extra 20 percentversus underselling yourself. But then the specific message he delivers about womenI think those spread animosity and hostility between the sexes. Another thing: Be careful about the messages and the images that youre exposed to on a daily basis. Especially when you're young and your brain is still developing, the content youre exposed to will affect you in implicit, unconscious ways. If youre constantly looking at black pill doomer stuff, and thats how you start your day, and then you think, "Okay, time to go and meet girls after I just consumed two hours of content telling me Im never going to get a girlfriend and everything sucks. Thats not a great plan. Seek out positive, affirming, uplifting messages. It doesnt have to be corny or cheesy, but optimistic messages, uplifting stuff that makes you feel good. Even if its episodes of your favorite old sitcom that make you laughthats a better mindset to go out into the world compared with the black pill content.
I watched a few of Andrew Tates videos. But some of his stuff, its not off-base. So much of it is embellished and weird and crazy, but the underlying message of "be irrationally bold and confident"its probably bad to be more confident than you should be, but it's far better than being under confident. Err on the side of boldness, of courage. Its better to give yourself
versus underselling yourself. But then the specific message he delivers about womenI think those spread animosity and hostility between the sexes. Another thing: Be careful about the messages and the images that youre exposed to on a daily basis. Especially when you're young and your brain is still developing, the content youre exposed to will affect you in implicit, unconscious ways. If youre constantly looking at black pill doomer stuff, and thats how you start your day, and then you think, "Okay, time to go and meet girls after I just consumed two hours of content telling me Im never going to get a girlfriend and everything sucks. Thats not a great plan. Seek out positive, affirming, uplifting messages. It doesnt have to be corny or cheesy, but optimistic messages, uplifting stuff that makes you feel good. Even if its episodes of your favorite old sitcom that make you laughthats a better mindset to go out into the world compared with the black pill content.
Richard:Yeah, and I think that exposing yourself to good material, its not just passively consuming, but also the people you surround yourself with. I think one reason this incel stuff has really taken off is that its much easier for miserable people to find each other. And they just encourage each other's miserable outlook on the world. If you have friends who are complaining all the time and talking about how much life sucks... I mean, it's sad. It's sad when people adopt these political talking points like, "Oh, Im white and Christian in America in 2024." Okay, you can have political opinions, but you are taking this stuff and using it to become... youre still lucky by world historical perspective, as much as you are upset about wokeness or transgenderism or gay pride or these other things. These people think life is not worth living because of this stuff. Yeah, just break out of that funk.
Yeah, and I think that exposing yourself to good material, its not just passively consuming, but also the people you surround yourself with. I think one reason this incel stuff has really taken off is that its much easier for miserable people to find each other. And they just encourage each other's miserable outlook on the world. If you have friends who are complaining all the time and talking about how much life sucks... I mean, it's sad. It's sad when people adopt these political talking points like, "Oh, Im white and Christian in America in 2024." Okay, you can have political opinions, but you are taking this stuff and using it to become... youre still lucky by world historical perspective, as much as you are upset about wokeness or transgenderism or gay pride or these other things. These people think life is not worth living because of this stuff. Yeah, just break out of that funk.
Rob:Even as recently as 15 years ago, if you were just an angry young guy who wasnt getting many dates, your options were to sit alone and stew bitterly. Eventually you would have to figure it out and go out into the world. But now so Ive listened to podcasts with William Costellohes a PhD student, David Busss student. He studies incels. And he describes these message boards where you essentially lose status in these incel message boards if you get a girlfriend. They make fun of you and mock you, where the entire status system is topsy-turvy and flipped. In that little sub-community, the cool thing is to be a bitter loser. You get more likes, upvotes, and plaudits for whining about being a loser and hating on women. If you get a girlfriend and post about it, the commenters are like "Oh, you were never really one of us. Youre a traitor." If youre immersed in that kind of online environment, then of course youre not going to get a girlfriend. Even if you dont actively participate, if you read that stuff, it will get into your head. So dont expose yourself to it. Look at happy, healthy stuff. What you put into your bodyfood, information, everythingit all affects you, even if you're not aware of it, especially when you're young.
Even as recently as 15 years ago, if you were just an angry young guy who wasnt getting many dates, your options were to sit alone and stew bitterly. Eventually you would have to figure it out and go out into the world. But now so Ive listened to podcasts with William Costellohes a PhD student, David Busss student. He studies incels. And he describes these message boards where you essentially lose status in these incel message boards if you get a girlfriend. They make fun of you and mock you, where the entire status system is topsy-turvy and flipped. In that little sub-community, the cool thing is to be a bitter loser. You get more likes, upvotes, and plaudits for whining about being a loser and hating on women. If you get a girlfriend and post about it, the commenters are like "Oh, you were never really one of us. Youre a traitor." If youre immersed in that kind of online environment, then of course youre not going to get a girlfriend. Even if you dont actively participate, if you read that stuff, it will get into your head. So dont expose yourself to it. Look at happy, healthy stuff. What you put into your bodyfood, information, everythingit all affects you, even if you're not aware of it, especially when you're young.
Richard:Yeah, I mean, the Nick Fuentes thing... like, theres rumors sometimes that he kissed a girl once or something, and it becomes a big controversy among...
Yeah, I mean, the Nick Fuentes thing... like, theres rumors sometimes that he kissed a girl once or something, and it becomes a big controversy among...
Rob:Is he supposed to be an incel or something?
Is he supposed to be an incel or something?
Richard:I think so, yeah. I think that's the point. Theres this trad cell thing where its like half "Im an incel" and half "I gave myself to Jesus."
I think so, yeah. I think that's the point. Theres this trad cell thing where its like half "Im an incel" and half "I gave myself to Jesus."
Rob:This is so stupid.
This is so stupid.
Richard:Its like, its both. Its like, "Im an incel, but I love Jesus. Im not going to touch this woman, but also I cant get women." Its a very unhealthy thing that has popped up online. But okay, yeah. This was a good conversation, Rob. I think we taught young people something. Anything else you want to stress before we wrap up?
Its like, its both. Its like, "Im an incel, but I love Jesus. Im not going to touch this woman, but also I cant get women." Its a very unhealthy thing that has popped up online. But okay, yeah. This was a good conversation, Rob. I think we taught young people something. Anything else you want to stress before we wrap up?
Rob:I think we basically covered the main points here. Id be curious to know ... what do people think? Whats worked for them? What hasnt? And maybe if we do a follow-up, what people would want to hear about as far as advice or commentary or something.
I think we basically covered the main points here. Id be curious to know ... what do people think? Whats worked for them? What hasnt? And maybe if we do a follow-up, what people would want to hear about as far as advice or commentary or something.
Richard:And if people are interested, Ive been thinking about doing more of this stuff. I wish I could, like, I wish I was young and single. I would live stream myself talking to women.
And if people are interested, Ive been thinking about doing more of this stuff. I wish I could, like, I wish I was young and single. I would live stream myself talking to women.
Rob:Helping the kids. Hopefully people benefited from this conversation. Thanks Richard.
Helping the kids. Hopefully people benefited from this conversation. Thanks Richard.
Richard:Bye.
Bye.
To receive new posts, access more than100 premium archived posts, and support my work, consider becoming a free or paid subscriber.
Subscribed

Comments
Restacks
L. Scott Urban
L. Scott Urban
Consistently Inconsistent
Consistently Inconsistent
Consistently Inconsistent
Aug 15
Just to put it out there, my dad first started dating my mom after asking his friends to ask her if she would be interested in going on a date with him.  Encouraging guys to do the difficult task of "cold-calling" is good and all, but there are definitely other, less risky/humiliating ways of asking people out on a date.  Encouraging those alternate methods is probably a good idea for the more reclusive, risk-averse portions of the population.
Just to put it out there, my dad first started dating my mom after asking his friends to ask her if she would be interested in going on a date with him.  Encouraging guys to do the difficult task of "cold-calling" is good and all, but there are definitely other, less risky/humiliating ways of asking people out on a date.  Encouraging those alternate methods is probably a good idea for the more reclusive, risk-averse portions of the population.
Heck, it might be time to re-institute the concept of a wingman, which is curiously absent from most modern day dating discourse.  Having a friend that can encourage you to take that difficult step in the moment, and give you a pat on the back and a beer when you fall flat on your face, can make all the difference.  Potentially, this could even turn the incel community on its head.  Instead of focusing on how each individual is dateless and alone, they should work together.  Each member focusing their energy on getting other members a date, and profiting collectively.  Less resentment when someone gets a girlfriend, an easier path out of inceldom, and an incentive for past incels to stick around and help out, adding some much needed positivity and wisdom to the group.
Heck, it might be time to re-institute the concept of a wingman, which is curiously absent from most modern day dating discourse.  Having a friend that can encourage you to take that difficult step in the moment, and give you a pat on the back and a beer when you fall flat on your face, can make all the difference.  Potentially, this could even turn the incel community on its head.  Instead of focusing on how each individual is dateless and alone, they should work together.  Each member focusing their energy on getting other members a date, and profiting collectively.  Less resentment when someone gets a girlfriend, an easier path out of inceldom, and an incentive for past incels to stick around and help out, adding some much needed positivity and wisdom to the group.
Like (6)
Reply
Share
Lucy
Lucy
Aug 15
Female subscriber here with 2 teen boys. More posts on this topic would be appreciated! Thanks!
Female subscriber here with 2 teen boys. More posts on this topic would be appreciated! Thanks!
Like (6)
Reply
Share
Top
Latest
Discussions

Rob Henderson

Rob Henderson

Rob Henderson

Rob Henderson

Rob Henderson

Rob Henderson

Rob Henderson

Rob Henderson

Rob Henderson

Rob Henderson


undefined subscriptions will be displayed on your profile (edit)
Skip for now
For your security, we need to re-authenticate you.
Click the link we sent to sasha.p.podolsky@gmail.com, orclick here to sign in.