

1
Book meeting
Book a meeting
I recently spoke with Richard Hanania about what it takes to make a living as a writer.
Below is the full transcript of our conversation.
Substack informs me that this post is too long for email, so youll have to open this post in a separate tab in order to read the whole thing.
Over onhis Substack, Richard has the audio and video of our conversation. Im trying to get Substack to allow my paid subscribers to get access to our paywalled podcast conversations that Richard hosts on his site. For now, though, Ill share these transcripts.
Over on
, Richard has the audio and video of our conversation. Im trying to get Substack to allow my paid subscribers to get access to our paywalled podcast conversations that Richard hosts on his site. For now, though, Ill share these transcripts.
Here are his opening remarks, followed by our discussion:
Rob joins me on the podcast to talk about what it takes to become a writer, public intellectual, or however one wants to describe what we do. This conversation can serve as a guide for those who might try to follow a similar path. But even if youre not going to be writing for a living, I think theres still a lot you can get out of our talk, as it served as an opportunity for us to take a step back and reflect on our previous work  and really our lives  up to this point.When we got to the topic of each of our writing processes, I came to realize that we have deep differences regarding how we get motivated, and our approach to life more generally. Rob says dont romanticize the process, while my philosophy is that romanticizing everything is the key to joy and meaning. Writing is something he occasionally has to force himself to do, while I hate taking breaks and vacations, and wish family life didnt pull me away from working even more. Rob of course is the psychologically normal one here, and which of us you decide to take advice from is going to depend on how exactly your mind works. Ironically, in the midst of our discussion about how we get ideas, I realized that I needed to at some point write an article on my romanticize everything philosophy. This is something I have thought about before but its been a while since Ive reflected on it.
Rob joins me on the podcast to talk about what it takes to become a writer, public intellectual, or however one wants to describe what we do. This conversation can serve as a guide for those who might try to follow a similar path. But even if youre not going to be writing for a living, I think theres still a lot you can get out of our talk, as it served as an opportunity for us to take a step back and reflect on our previous work  and really our lives  up to this point.
When we got to the topic of each of our writing processes, I came to realize that we have deep differences regarding how we get motivated, and our approach to life more generally. Rob says dont romanticize the process, while my philosophy is that romanticizing everything is the key to joy and meaning. Writing is something he occasionally has to force himself to do, while I hate taking breaks and vacations, and wish family life didnt pull me away from working even more. Rob of course is the psychologically normal one here, and which of us you decide to take advice from is going to depend on how exactly your mind works. Ironically, in the midst of our discussion about how we get ideas, I realized that I needed to at some point write an article on my romanticize everything philosophy. This is something I have thought about before but its been a while since Ive reflected on it.
Other topics we cover include:
How we describe our jobs to other people
What it was like having one foot out the door of academia
How we both sort of stumbled into our current positions
The odds of actually making money at this
How to build an audience
The ways in which we use X
Internet fame as a way for single young men to find girlfriends
Avoiding audience capture
Why we were both lucky to start our newsletters around the time that we did, rather than a few years later
Dealing with book publishers and the prestige media
Why journalists, academics, and independent writers all tend to share similar characteristics
The ways in which various writers like Razib Khan, Scott Alexander, Freddie deBoer, and others have been able to make it on their own, and how their different backgrounds have contributed to their success
This ended up being one of the most inspiring conversations Ive had in a while. It was fascinating to hear Robs story and invigorating to reflect on my own, and I felt a sense of overwhelming gratitude when considering just how much serendipity was needed for both of us to end up where we are.
This ended up being one of the most inspiring conversations Ive had in a while. It was fascinating to hear Robs story and invigorating to reflect on my own, and I felt a sense of overwhelming gratitude when considering just how much serendipity was needed for both of us to end up where we are.
Richard:Hi everyone. Welcome to the podcast. Im here with Rob. Were going to talk today about our lives as public intellectuals. Do you like that term, Rob, public intellectual?
Hi everyone. Welcome to the podcast. Im here with Rob. Were going to talk today about our lives as public intellectuals. Do you like that term, Rob, public intellectual?
Rob:Im not a fan of it, but I guess its a term that people use, and its sort of a shorthand way to communicate whatever it is we do.
Im not a fan of it, but I guess its a term that people use, and its sort of a shorthand way to communicate whatever it is we do.
Richard:Yeah, I mean, just to say writer, Im a thinker. Im an intellectual. Intellectual seems sort of too self-serious. Public intellectual.
Yeah, I mean, just to say writer, Im a thinker. Im an intellectual. Intellectual seems sort of too self-serious. Public intellectual.
Rob:Yeah, yeah, public makes it sound more accessible in a way, thats true.
Yeah, yeah, public makes it sound more accessible in a way, thats true.
Richard:Yeah, but I like the idea of taking ourselves seriously. Im a writer. When people ask me, what do I do? What do you say? You dont say public intellectual if someone asks you, do you?
Yeah, but I like the idea of taking ourselves seriously. Im a writer. When people ask me, what do I do? What do you say? You dont say public intellectual if someone asks you, do you?
Rob:No, I actually usually just say writer. Yeah, sometimes Ill say like online writer or internet writer. It depends, like if Im talking to an older person, then I can say online writer. Because if you tell an older person that youre a writer, then theyre like, oh, who do you write for? What do you write? Or what do you know? They want to know the details, but if you say internet writer, then in their old boomer brain, theyre just like, oh, he just writes things on the internet and someone pays him.
No, I actually usually just say writer. Yeah, sometimes Ill say like online writer or internet writer. It depends, like if Im talking to an older person, then I can say online writer. Because if you tell an older person that youre a writer, then theyre like, oh, who do you write for? What do you write? Or what do you know? They want to know the details, but if you say internet writer, then in their old boomer brain, theyre just like, oh, he just writes things on the internet and someone pays him.
Richard:Yeah. Well, I mean that diminishes you a little bit because youve stepped into the real world. Youve been in newspapers and you have a book coming out.
Yeah. Well, I mean that diminishes you a little bit because youve stepped into the real world. Youve been in newspapers and you have a book coming out.
Rob:Yeah. I guess you could say author, right? I guess yeah, I could start to say author. You can say author. What do you say?
Yeah. I guess you could say author, right? I guess yeah, I could start to say author. You can say author. What do you say?
Richard:I say writer. I say exactly that. Oh, Im a writer. Im on Twitter. I try to avoid the conversation because people will want to talk about politics. Its not just what I randomly want to talk about with people. And so Ill just sort of be vague. Usually Ill say, oh yeah, Im a writer. I write for Twitter. Im on Substack. And then people are like, oh, thats so interesting usually.
I say writer. I say exactly that. Oh, Im a writer. Im on Twitter. I try to avoid the conversation because people will want to talk about politics. Its not just what I randomly want to talk about with people. And so Ill just sort of be vague. Usually Ill say, oh yeah, Im a writer. I write for Twitter. Im on Substack. And then people are like, oh, thats so interesting usually.
Rob:How often do people know, like when you say Substack, when you interact with strangers, do they know what that is?
How often do people know, like when you say Substack, when you interact with strangers, do they know what that is?
Richard:Mostly not. I usually might say I have my own newsletter.
Mostly not. I usually might say I have my own newsletter.
Rob:Okay, yeah. Yeah, I would say, yeah, its like, its pretty hit or miss. I would say maybe a third of the people, maybe a fourth of the people when I say Substack, they have any idea what it is. Its weird because in our circles, right, like everyone knows what Substack is, everyone who is sort of plugged into online culture and independent writing and stuff. They know what it is. But in the real world, just like whatever talking to whatever staff at the airport or something, theyre just like, whats that? Newsletter, I think people kind of get but I still think a lot of people are confused how you get paid for it.
Okay, yeah. Yeah, I would say, yeah, its like, its pretty hit or miss. I would say maybe a third of the people, maybe a fourth of the people when I say Substack, they have any idea what it is. Its weird because in our circles, right, like everyone knows what Substack is, everyone who is sort of plugged into online culture and independent writing and stuff. They know what it is. But in the real world, just like whatever talking to whatever staff at the airport or something, theyre just like, whats that? Newsletter, I think people kind of get but I still think a lot of people are confused how you get paid for it.
Richard:Yeah, yeah. So whatever we are, this is advice how to become whatever this thing is, to become a writer. Or were also podcast guys. I mean, we also do a lot of, so yeah, God, were content creators, were like Aella, right? It puts us all in the same category as OnlyFans.
Yeah, yeah. So whatever we are, this is advice how to become whatever this thing is, to become a writer. Or were also podcast guys. I mean, we also do a lot of, so yeah, God, were content creators, were like Aella, right? It puts us all in the same category as OnlyFans.
Rob:Im a content creator. Maybe Ill start saying that, Ive never, thats never even occurred to me. Sometimes people will refer to me as an influencer. And that also feels weird because Im not like I have Instagram. Influencer to me feels like more image driven or someone whos trying to promote a green smoothie and has sponsorship deals and that doesnt sound right eitherinfluencer.
Im a content creator. Maybe Ill start saying that, Ive never, thats never even occurred to me. Sometimes people will refer to me as an influencer. And that also feels weird because Im not like I have Instagram. Influencer to me feels like more image driven or someone whos trying to promote a green smoothie and has sponsorship deals and that doesnt sound right eitherinfluencer.
Richard:Or like you hear it in politics, like theyre political hacks, youll hear like a DeSantis influencer or a Trump influencer. And that I think diminishes me and you who are trying to be saying something more substantive.
Or like you hear it in politics, like theyre political hacks, youll hear like a DeSantis influencer or a Trump influencer. And that I think diminishes me and you who are trying to be saying something more substantive.
Rob:Thats weird too. Yeah. Id rather be called a grifter than an influencer. [laughter]
Thats weird too. Yeah. Id rather be called a grifter than an influencer. [laughter]
Richard:So yeah, so this is like sort of advice for young people. Did you, so I think a lot of people are probably like me, they maybe start out in academia because they want to be intellectuals of some kind or write or research for a living. You got your PhD. Did you ever consider becoming an academic?
So yeah, so this is like sort of advice for young people. Did you, so I think a lot of people are probably like me, they maybe start out in academia because they want to be intellectuals of some kind or write or research for a living. You got your PhD. Did you ever consider becoming an academic?
Rob:Oh yeah. Yeah, I did, I did. I mean, I think this is like the people on Substack, almost all of them, I think who have a relatively large size audience started out either in academia or journalism or with those career paths in mind because making a living as an independent writer hasnt been around for that long. Yeah, when I started college, I did have that plan. PhD was already sort of baked in because I wanted to be a professor. I wanted to go to grad school. And that was actually one of the reasons why I decided to go to the UK. I know you recentlytalked to Nathanabout whats happening in the UK and stuff.
Oh yeah. Yeah, I did, I did. I mean, I think this is like the people on Substack, almost all of them, I think who have a relatively large size audience started out either in academia or journalism or with those career paths in mind because making a living as an independent writer hasnt been around for that long. Yeah, when I started college, I did have that plan. PhD was already sort of baked in because I wanted to be a professor. I wanted to go to grad school. And that was actually one of the reasons why I decided to go to the UK. I know you recently
about whats happening in the UK and stuff.
And its true. Its a bit less politically crazy and theres like a slightly greater chance of getting a decent job as a non-leftist, but still its crazy. Its crazy in the UK too and at Cambridge I saw Noah got fired and then Jordan got disinvited and all this crazy stuff was happening. And so then around that time, this was like, kind of fortunate timing, early 2020 was when I launched my newsletter on some, it looks really crappy now in hindsight, but it was like this kind of makeshift thing that I did on Mailchimp that I sent out once a week.
Then yeah, put it on Substack later. But yeah, I wanted to be a professor. Or like I did have this thought, like maybe I can, because by that point Id also had a couple of op-eds placed in some pretty prominent outlets. So I thought, oh, maybe one of these places will take me as a regular contributor or something. So yeah, definitely that was the original plan for me. When did you decide to veer in a different direction?
Richard:I think you could tell, if historians wanted to look back on it, they could see that my Twitter gets crazier over time. [laughter] And like the degree of I was still thinking about academia is like the normalcy of my Twitter. And so for the first year or so, I sort of pretended to be like a normal person who might be able to fit into academia. And so yeah, it was just when I sort of dipped my toe in the water, I was just tweeting a little bit.
I think you could tell, if historians wanted to look back on it, they could see that my Twitter gets crazier over time. [laughter] And like the degree of I was still thinking about academia is like the normalcy of my Twitter. And so for the first year or so, I sort of pretended to be like a normal person who might be able to fit into academia. And so yeah, it was just when I sort of dipped my toe in the water, I was just tweeting a little bit.
I was doing Substacks, it was just like a few. And like one of them really took off and it wasWhy Is Everything Liberal?in 2021. And then I was like, Oh, wait a minute, I can do this. And this is much better. This is all the upsides of academia without the downsides. If you can, I mean, like just, maybe were skipping ahead a little bit. The good sides about academia are freedom, being able to make your own time, follow your interests.
I was doing Substacks, it was just like a few. And like one of them really took off and it was
in 2021. And then I was like, Oh, wait a minute, I can do this. And this is much better. This is all the upsides of academia without the downsides. If you can, I mean, like just, maybe were skipping ahead a little bit. The good sides about academia are freedom, being able to make your own time, follow your interests.
Right? So you get to do that. And even more so, people I dont think understand how constrained academia is. Half your time youre looking up the right citations that you need to have in order to get things past reviewers. But without the downside, without not knowing where Im going to work, having to teach classes, having to put up with wokeness and diversity seminars and so forth. Especially the time thing, the time thing.
To be an academic, you have to be in one field, right? Like Ill write an essay where Ill draw from evolutionary psychology and Ill draw from economics and Ill draw from political science and Ill draw just like from my own experiences. And you cant do that in academia. Its so constraining the way you need to write things in order to be published.
Rob:Yeah, the reference thing is so annoying. Well, you think you have to put the right references in and every, yeah
Yeah, the reference thing is so annoying. Well, you think you have to put the right references in and every, yeah
Richard:Exactly. Yeah, so as soon as I got a taste, early 2021, I said, this is everything I want from academia, but with none of the downsides. I was just all in at that point.
Exactly. Yeah, so as soon as I got a taste, early 2021, I said, this is everything I want from academia, but with none of the downsides. I was just all in at that point.
Rob:Yeah, yeah, I remember I think it was my first or second year of my PhD program, and I had written a pretty good draft of a paper. But then, yeah, the feedback I was getting was like, oh, you didnt reference this, you know, obscure paper from 2007 or this person or that, or you cite this person, but they also wrote another paper on the same topic. You should cite that one too. And like somehow citing properly. I mean, yeah, its, its basically like a signal that you did your homework and it somehow implicitly helps to strengthen the argument because it shows that you have read the relevant literature and blah but it just seemed like why do I have to cite like every single paper on this topic that this one person wrote? Why cant I just cite one of them or two of them or the most recent one? But yeah the whole citation ring thing is kind of silly.
Yeah, yeah, I remember I think it was my first or second year of my PhD program, and I had written a pretty good draft of a paper. But then, yeah, the feedback I was getting was like, oh, you didnt reference this, you know, obscure paper from 2007 or this person or that, or you cite this person, but they also wrote another paper on the same topic. You should cite that one too. And like somehow citing properly. I mean, yeah, its, its basically like a signal that you did your homework and it somehow implicitly helps to strengthen the argument because it shows that you have read the relevant literature and blah but it just seemed like why do I have to cite like every single paper on this topic that this one person wrote? Why cant I just cite one of them or two of them or the most recent one? But yeah the whole citation ring thing is kind of silly.
Yeah, like the imposed structure, I mean, peer review was a nightmare in general, not only having your papers reviewed, but then also having to review other papers too. This is like free, I guess its free, you know, in quotes, because you are getting paid as a professor, as an academic to do this kind of work and contribute to knowledge and whatever. But it just seemed like a lot of unhelpful and pointless minutia that I didnt expect would go along with the job. And then, yeah, like you do have freedom, more freedom than you would as whatever, like an associate at McKinsey or something, but you do end up having less freedom than you anticipate, especially kind of the higher you go, right?
Postdoc is probably, like if you just want to do pure research, postdoc is probably the best because all youre doing is writing research papers. But then as a PhD, you have to write your thesis and it all has to be sort of narrowly defined into one thing. And you do end up having to operate within a relatively small niche.
Maybe as a professor you have a bit more freedom and time to expand, broaden your horizons when you make tenure, but its a long way there. You have to color within the lines. Like you mentioned you have to be like a normal person on Twitter. Its a, theres a lot of, you know, youre already sacrificing a lot in terms of income to pursue that job. Youd make like a third or less of what youd make for an equivalent kind of position with that level of education outside of the academy. I guess thats a question too we can maybe touch on later: is it true that people go into academia because they cant hack it in the real world?
But yeah, I had the same experience. Once I started writing online and getting responses and getting some traction, and it wasnt like I was writing for dumb people. I was writing stuff that interested me and smart people were responding to it and sharing it. And that was gratifying too, to see that you dont have to just write something that only three people will ever read. And it goes, you know, its a line on your CV and then you just move on.
And that you could get an equal or larger audience as you would as a columnist somewhere too, right? And its becoming more accepted to be able to write online on a Substack or something.
Richard:Did you ever teach classes?
Did you ever teach classes?
Rob:Yeah, I mean, I taught classes and the actual teaching is fine, but I hated grading papers. Yeah, interacting with students and stuff, that can be fun, especially in a topic like psychology, or you were teaching political science, right? That was your thing. And so these topics are inherently interesting. But yeah, just the grading of the papers is also mind-numbing.
Yeah, I mean, I taught classes and the actual teaching is fine, but I hated grading papers. Yeah, interacting with students and stuff, that can be fun, especially in a topic like psychology, or you were teaching political science, right? That was your thing. And so these topics are inherently interesting. But yeah, just the grading of the papers is also mind-numbing.
Richard:Its not the worst job in the world. Its not thebiggest torture for me, but it wasnt something Id want to do for free, right? It wasnt something like, okay, if I can do something and not have to waste time doing this, it was still better. Its also sort of not believing in, like thinking education is just sort of fake, which I think most smart people believe that. I just think its demoralizing to be like, okay, these people are just jumping through hoops.
Its not the worst job in the world. Its not thebiggest torture for me, but it wasnt something Id want to do for free, right? It wasnt something like, okay, if I can do something and not have to waste time doing this, it was still better. Its also sort of not believing in, like thinking education is just sort of fake, which I think most smart people believe that. I just think its demoralizing to be like, okay, these people are just jumping through hoops.
Im like the warden to just pass them along and were just sort of wasting away. Were wasting away the lives of our youth and Im just sort of the guardian of the process. I try to teach them something so they do get something out of it. I try to help them understand something about the world, but most of them dont care. Like 10% or 20% of them care to some extent, but most dont and thats a bit demoralizing.
Rob:And were talking from the position of a graduate student or like maybe, a postdoc. And, they dont even knowMost undergrads arent going to go to grad school. The vast majority definitely arent getting PhDs. And so they dont even really know who you are, what you do. They just know that youre kind of a lackey for the professor. Youre just like the gatekeeper for the grade.
And were talking from the position of a graduate student or like maybe, a postdoc. And, they dont even knowMost undergrads arent going to go to grad school. The vast majority definitely arent getting PhDs. And so they dont even really know who you are, what you do. They just know that youre kind of a lackey for the professor. Youre just like the gatekeeper for the grade.
They just are sort of disconnected from Theyre more interested in the professor than they are in you. And which is understandable, but it is kind of another factor of demoralization.
Richard:I dont know. I felt they were interested in me. Youre closer in age to them. You can relate to them better than the professor. So youre sort of like a student like them, but youre also sort of an authority figure. So that could make you sort of close to them, depending on who they are.
I dont know. I felt they were interested in me. Youre closer in age to them. You can relate to them better than the professor. So youre sort of like a student like them, but youre also sort of an authority figure. So that could make you sort of close to them, depending on who they are.
Rob:Yeah, I guess. I mean, yeah, maybe for some of them. But I think by and large, they just dont really care in general. And they just know that the professor has the final say on the grade that goes on their transcript. And so like, yeah, its fine, though. I mean, yeah, its not the worst job if you can get it.
Yeah, I guess. I mean, yeah, maybe for some of them. But I think by and large, they just dont really care in general. And they just know that the professor has the final say on the grade that goes on their transcript. And so like, yeah, its fine, though. I mean, yeah, its not the worst job if you can get it.
But more and more, when I see people who work these jobs and I know the amount of self-censorship and stifling their views and yeah its like the opposite of what I would have expected. You know I went into it a little bit naive of the whole higher education debates and disputes around what its for and everything, but I just did not expect the place where youre supposed to deal in the world of ideas to be one of the most stifling places or stifling environments, and Substack allows you to basically write whatever you want.
Richard:One thing we should point out is me and you have broad interests. So we are people who will write a thing that a lot of people will want to read. So this might not apply to everyone. If your passion is ancient Sanskrit or something, youre probably going to want to be in academia because theyre going to teach you how to research that stuff, learn the right languages and go to the right places. So it really depends. I mean, I guess this is for people who have some kind of broad topic that could potentially be of interest to a lot of people.
One thing we should point out is me and you have broad interests. So we are people who will write a thing that a lot of people will want to read. So this might not apply to everyone. If your passion is ancient Sanskrit or something, youre probably going to want to be in academia because theyre going to teach you how to research that stuff, learn the right languages and go to the right places. So it really depends. I mean, I guess this is for people who have some kind of broad topic that could potentially be of interest to a lot of people.
Rob:Yeah, you have to be a bit of a generalist, thats true.
Yeah, you have to be a bit of a generalist, thats true.
Richard:And so, yeah, not everyone is a generalist. I mean, I think that one of the reasons I think me and you, like not everyone, got maybe frustrated because its just too narrow. I felt like I had things to say in the world that incorporated a lot of different sort of sources of knowledge. And not everyone is necessarily like that. And so yeah, its great work, public intellectual, great work if you can get it. What advice would you have for people, Rob? So how do people do this? Because not a lot of people do it. Academia is rare. I think what we do is also very rare. And so like, yeah, what is the path as far as we could tell?
And so, yeah, not everyone is a generalist. I mean, I think that one of the reasons I think me and you, like not everyone, got maybe frustrated because its just too narrow. I felt like I had things to say in the world that incorporated a lot of different sort of sources of knowledge. And not everyone is necessarily like that. And so yeah, its great work, public intellectual, great work if you can get it. What advice would you have for people, Rob? So how do people do this? Because not a lot of people do it. Academia is rare. I think what we do is also very rare. And so like, yeah, what is the path as far as we could tell?
Rob:For me, it wasnt planned in advance. So the way I ended up here was through sort of small experiments that went well. I mean, I didnt think of them as experiments at the time, but one way to think about it is if you write tweets or share ideas or post things that youre interested in or whatever, and you are able to build an audience and gain some attention for it on Twitter, then you can sort of
For me, it wasnt planned in advance. So the way I ended up here was through sort of small experiments that went well. I mean, I didnt think of them as experiments at the time, but one way to think about it is if you write tweets or share ideas or post things that youre interested in or whatever, and you are able to build an audience and gain some attention for it on Twitter, then you can sort of
This is what happened for me. So on Twitter, I started posting things or sharing things or write the occasional Twitter thread or something, get some traction, get a bit of a following. And then once I hit like, I think 10,000 Twitter followers, then Im like, what do I do now? I mean, I can keep going with this. Maybe, Ill try the newsletter route. A lot of people are doing newsletters. This was early 2020. Substack hadnt quite hit big the way that it is now, but it was like in the air, people were talking about it, but I just started this little thing on Mailchimp.
A bit more sort of medium to long form content that was taking off and doing really well. And then from there, made the switch to Substack and then just started promoting it very heavily. And so it was sort of a step-by-step procedure of start small, start with Twitter, then move to Mailchimp or whatever, and then go on from there.
But yeah, do you think it is actually possible to strategize in advance to like become a public intellectual? Is that something that one can actually do?
Richard:I think youre getting at something, because its mine too. I sort of stumbled into it. See, when I give people advice, its like write a Substack, write something, write an article youre interested in, maybe itll go viral. Maybe youll really pick something up. And so I think thats often what happens. Youre going sort of where the opportunities are.
I think youre getting at something, because its mine too. I sort of stumbled into it. See, when I give people advice, its like write a Substack, write something, write an article youre interested in, maybe itll go viral. Maybe youll really pick something up. And so I think thats often what happens. Youre going sort of where the opportunities are.
I wonder, I think me and you are very lucky timing-wise, because people are subscribing to less Substacks because when Substack was new, I thought it was easy to get subscribers.
And now I see some, when you get a subscriber, it says Joe Smith subscribed to you. He subscribes to four other Substacks, youre going to list them. And now Ill get like, heres Joe Smith, he subscribes to 85 Substacks, right? And like you didnt used to see that. And so I think people are becoming a lot more selective.
Rob:Yeah. Saturated.
Yeah. Saturated.
Richard:Exactly. And so there are a lot of, theyre unsubscribing or theyre never subscribing to stuff. And we were relatively early, like you were earlier than me in 2020, I think Substacks became a thing. And then 2021, I started taking off. And one thing I noticed is with the recommendations with Substack, when I used to get a recommendation, I would get tons and tons of subscribers. So you can track this stuff. You gave me a recommendation and I got like a thousand subscribers off of that. Recently Rufo gave me a recommendation, and Rufo I think is similar to you or bigger than you on Substack, and it was pretty much nothing. And you could see this now.
Exactly. And so there are a lot of, theyre unsubscribing or theyre never subscribing to stuff. And we were relatively early, like you were earlier than me in 2020, I think Substacks became a thing. And then 2021, I started taking off. And one thing I noticed is with the recommendations with Substack, when I used to get a recommendation, I would get tons and tons of subscribers. So you can track this stuff. You gave me a recommendation and I got like a thousand subscribers off of that. Recently Rufo gave me a recommendation, and Rufo I think is similar to you or bigger than you on Substack, and it was pretty much nothing. And you could see this now.
Maybe its partly everyone who likes Rufo and wanted to subscribe to me is already subscribed to me or whatever. But with every recommendation I noticed they used to be huge and now theyre not really worth anything
Rob:Its diminishing. Yeah, thats a good point to bring up, the sort of unpredictable role of timing, where yeah, you cant necessarily plan for good luck. And so, yeah, with subs. And it was also like for me, because again, I started on Mailchimp. But it was January of 2020 when I launched it on Mailchimp. And its impossible to know the counterfactual. But I do think to some extent, the lockdowns helped for a lot of podcasters and newsletter writers because people are just sitting at home. Theres no boss looking over your shoulders so you can like fuck around and browse on the internet more often and like, whatever, if I want to open up a podcast and read a newsletter and just sort of let your attention wander a bit more. And so yeah, I was writing these newsletters at a time when everyone was just in the screen bunker at home or in their apartment.
Its diminishing. Yeah, thats a good point to bring up, the sort of unpredictable role of timing, where yeah, you cant necessarily plan for good luck. And so, yeah, with subs. And it was also like for me, because again, I started on Mailchimp. But it was January of 2020 when I launched it on Mailchimp. And its impossible to know the counterfactual. But I do think to some extent, the lockdowns helped for a lot of podcasters and newsletter writers because people are just sitting at home. Theres no boss looking over your shoulders so you can like fuck around and browse on the internet more often and like, whatever, if I want to open up a podcast and read a newsletter and just sort of let your attention wander a bit more. And so yeah, I was writing these newsletters at a time when everyone was just in the screen bunker at home or in their apartment.
Richard:Yeah. How many subscribers did you take to Substack with you when you were on Mailchimp? How much did you get that early? Just because Mailchimp was something different.
Yeah. How many subscribers did you take to Substack with you when you were on Mailchimp? How much did you get that early? Just because Mailchimp was something different.
Rob:I dont even know why I did Mailchimp. I dont even know why. At the time I wasnt subscribed to that many newsletters, but of the newsletters that I did subscribe to, I think it was the two that were on my radar were Mailchimp and ConvertKit. And I was like, oh, Mailchimp, whatever. Like I had to pay a fee. I dont remember what, I had to pay like $50 a month to have my newsletter on Mailchimp, which is in hindsight ridiculous that I had to pay anything at all. But yeah, I paid 50 bucks a month.
I dont even know why I did Mailchimp. I dont even know why. At the time I wasnt subscribed to that many newsletters, but of the newsletters that I did subscribe to, I think it was the two that were on my radar were Mailchimp and ConvertKit. And I was like, oh, Mailchimp, whatever. Like I had to pay a fee. I dont remember what, I had to pay like $50 a month to have my newsletter on Mailchimp, which is in hindsight ridiculous that I had to pay anything at all. But yeah, I paid 50 bucks a month.
I transferred, so yeah, January 2020, and then Substack approached me with one of their pro offers in, was this like March of 2022? So a little over two years later. And I had like 14,000 on Mailchimp that they just imported into Substack.
I had a lot of growth that first year on Substack. It like doubled in size. But then, yeah, I am noticing its harder and harder to get new subscribers. But yeah, I think that period from like 2020 to 2022, that was like the peak of Substack. Its still doing well, but not like it was then where, like as soon as I announced it on Twitter, hey, Im on Substack now, I have a link. The other thing, you know, this connects to our earlier points about academia. I didnt have a shareable link for my Mailchimp. I had that too, where if you wanted to read this newsletter, you could only open it your inbox.That was the only way you could read it.
And this reduced the likelihood of them linking it on Twitter and going viral and taking some out of context thing. Every once in a while someone would share a screenshot from it, but it was usually like nothing inflammatory or reputation destroying. But I did that for a reason just in case. So like yeah that was like a sort of safeguarding on my part. But then yeah, Substack was way easier to build an audience there.
Rob:How about you, how did it happen? When, why did you decide to start a Substack? What led to that decision and why were you doing that?
How about you, how did it happen? When, why did you decide to start a Substack? What led to that decision and why were you doing that?
Richard:Yeah, my goal was always to be a writer of some kind. I just I love reading books and essays and like, oh, you can be an academic, you can do this for a living? And I saw a lot of academics were also public intellectuals too. Thats what I thought was like the standard path to become a kind of public intellectual. And so I just always wanted to get stuff out there. And then, actually I wasstarting CSPIand one of the original goals of CSPI was to have, somebody wanted to help me out with this, to do like academia outside of academia.
Yeah, my goal was always to be a writer of some kind. I just I love reading books and essays and like, oh, you can be an academic, you can do this for a living? And I saw a lot of academics were also public intellectuals too. Thats what I thought was like the standard path to become a kind of public intellectual. And so I just always wanted to get stuff out there. And then, actually I was
and one of the original goals of CSPI was to have, somebody wanted to help me out with this, to do like academia outside of academia.
And that was the original vision. I found that there wasnt a lot of people who wanted to do good academic work, I found myself more and more drawn to my own work and being more interested in that. But CSPI is still around and we still publish some stuff. But yeah, I mean, so I always knew that.
So the Substack was, I just saw everyone else doing it. Yeah, I mean, it was just in the news. It was like, Substack is this new thing. I mean, I think at the time, I think Andrew Sullivan and Scott Alexander were two of the first ones or very early ones to get on there. And so it was just like, sort of in the air. This is the thing you did. And then I wrote this piece for Substack called,Why You Should Be on Substack.
So the Substack was, I just saw everyone else doing it. Yeah, I mean, it was just in the news. It was like, Substack is this new thing. I mean, I think at the time, I think Andrew Sullivan and Scott Alexander were two of the first ones or very early ones to get on there. And so it was just like, sort of in the air. This is the thing you did. And then I wrote this piece for Substack called,
I mean, its just good tech in the sense that its so user friendly. Everything here is integrated, right? The paid subscriptions are integrated. You get the email, you get the website, you can do a podcast that just comes into your stream like a normal podcast, like the one that people are listening to now. It was just, you know, I always wanted to be a writer of some kind. And so just it was sort of in the air. And I was like, well, then when I started using it, this product is great. And so yeah, I started writing and thankfully it took off. But yeah, the timing thing is so important. I wonder...
Yeah, so another thing I was thinking about at the time, I had some think tank gigs. So I was at Defense Priorities for a while. So actually, we should actually say, another way you could do it besides just going on your own, going on Twitter, or going on Substack, is to do the think tank thing.
I was pretty in demand because I had academic credentials and most think tanks, or a lot of think tanks I talked to, they seemed like they were willing to employ me. So if youve got some academic credentials, the think tanks, they usually make as much money or more money than academia. You get to actually be policy influential. They help you. You get op-eds in major papers and you can promote your work. Its complimentary. Ive seen some think tank people like at Cato, like now have their own personal Substacks where they republish articles. Rufo does this on his Substack. Hes got the Manhattan Institute, he does something forCity Journal, also sends it out on Substack.
I was pretty in demand because I had academic credentials and most think tanks, or a lot of think tanks I talked to, they seemed like they were willing to employ me. So if youve got some academic credentials, the think tanks, they usually make as much money or more money than academia. You get to actually be policy influential. They help you. You get op-eds in major papers and you can promote your work. Its complimentary. Ive seen some think tank people like at Cato, like now have their own personal Substacks where they republish articles. Rufo does this on his Substack. Hes got the Manhattan Institute, he does something for
, also sends it out on Substack.
And so what you and I do, like completely independent, is rare, very rare. And most people who do it on Substack, like the ones who can make a living, had some mainstream media background like Yglesias or Jesse Signal or something like that. Me and you, how many people just came out of nothing? Like literally had no institutional affiliation? I think Scott Alexander, me, you, Freddie deBoer, yeah. Razib I think had no institutional affiliation. Yeah, like five, you could name five, 10 people in our circle. I mean, Im sure there are leftists who weve never heard of who probably came up from nothing, but its not that many people.
Rob:Yeah, Scott Alexander. Hes a good example. Freddie deBoer. Yeah.
Yeah, Scott Alexander. Hes a good example. Freddie deBoer. Yeah.
Richard:I dont know if the idea of just become your own writer and be on Substack. I dont know if its realistic advice, especially now that with the timing that Substack is harder. And the other thing, Elon Musk changing the algorithm to make outside links go less viral, particularly Substack. Thats also a problem. Ive seen the change too.
I dont know if the idea of just become your own writer and be on Substack. I dont know if its realistic advice, especially now that with the timing that Substack is harder. And the other thing, Elon Musk changing the algorithm to make outside links go less viral, particularly Substack. Thats also a problem. Ive seen the change too.
Rob:Yeah, I mean, you can change the domain, which helps.
Yeah, I mean, you can change the domain, which helps.
Richard:No, no, but they deprioritize all links. Even if you go to theNew York Timesor something, its just less likely to go viral because they want you to stay on Twitter. So its still a problem.
No, no, but they deprioritize all links. Even if you go to the
or something, its just less likely to go viral because they want you to stay on Twitter. So its still a problem.
Rob:Oh yeah, Ive noticed that because you can see now the number of views your tweets get and if I just write a tweet with nothing it gets many more views than if I link to something. Or if I share an image without a link or something and so yeah people are getting around it, theyll post an article and then theyll say link in bio, which is like what they used to do on Instagram and its weird that theyre doing it to Twitter now.
Oh yeah, Ive noticed that because you can see now the number of views your tweets get and if I just write a tweet with nothing it gets many more views than if I link to something. Or if I share an image without a link or something and so yeah people are getting around it, theyll post an article and then theyll say link in bio, which is like what they used to do on Instagram and its weird that theyre doing it to Twitter now.
Richard:Yeah. Well, yeah, but the thing is you want to build the biggest audience possible. So its like if you lose 50% of people or whatever, I mean, thats
Yeah. Well, yeah, but the thing is you want to build the biggest audience possible. So its like if you lose 50% of people or whatever, I mean, thats
Rob:Yeah, but I dont think its.like these are all forces that are important to keep in mind, but I hope it doesnt deter anyone. If you have something to say and if youre an interesting writer, you can still like get, like the way that I started to build an audience on Twitter was through writing interesting tweets or sharing interesting excerpts or whatever. And like big accounts would retweet me. And so you can, and this can still work, I think, or even on Substack
Yeah, but I dont think its.like these are all forces that are important to keep in mind, but I hope it doesnt deter anyone. If you have something to say and if youre an interesting writer, you can still like get, like the way that I started to build an audience on Twitter was through writing interesting tweets or sharing interesting excerpts or whatever. And like big accounts would retweet me. And so you can, and this can still work, I think, or even on Substack
You know, I did import quite a sizable audience, but I have seen Substacks do well by basically having traffic directed to their Substack from other bigger Substacks. And so its still possible. I mean, its important, I think, to be realistic. I dont think you can plan in advance to make a living through Substack alone, but I do think it can be a semi-lucrative side hustle for any writer with a moderate to large amount of talent or just has a bit of writing talent. So are you going to get rich off of it? No. Can you make a living off of it? Probably not. But can you make a decent side hustle income from it? I think thats definitely possible. And especially if, I mean, there is this interesting question of credentials.
Richard:Well, maybe Im more optimistic than you. You can make a living. Me and you both make livings. You can make a living compared to...
Well, maybe Im more optimistic than you. You can make a living. Me and you both make livings. You can make a living compared to...
Rob:But can you plan to do it? I dont know if its a reasonable thing to plan for, right? If youre some like bright 25-year-old person whos like, I want to make a living through writing and Im going to do it on Substack, I dont know if you can have that plan and then fulfil it as an ambition in advance, maybe but temper your expectations.
But can you plan to do it? I dont know if its a reasonable thing to plan for, right? If youre some like bright 25-year-old person whos like, I want to make a living through writing and Im going to do it on Substack, I dont know if you can have that plan and then fulfil it as an ambition in advance, maybe but temper your expectations.
Richard:Look, well, think about it like this. People go to graduate school, they spend six years in academia not making any money for like a 30% chance they can become a professor, which sucks a lot.
Look, well, think about it like this. People go to graduate school, they spend six years in academia not making any money for like a 30% chance they can become a professor, which sucks a lot.
Rob:Yeah, yeah. Well, thats interesting. Okay, so whats more likely, to become a tenure track professor or make a living on Substack? Like those two might be roughly equal and most PhDs dont become
Yeah, yeah. Well, thats interesting. Okay, so whats more likely, to become a tenure track professor or make a living on Substack? Like those two might be roughly equal and most PhDs dont become
Richard:It depends on who you are. For me, it was much more likely Id be on Substack than find a job in academia. I mean, so it really depends on your personality and your sort of focus to some extent. Yeah, I mean, thats the thing. Its like me and you, we had a few things that went viral, and then we could build off of that. So you should probably just take your best thoughts and then make a Substack and write essays and hopefully those go viral.
It depends on who you are. For me, it was much more likely Id be on Substack than find a job in academia. I mean, so it really depends on your personality and your sort of focus to some extent. Yeah, I mean, thats the thing. Its like me and you, we had a few things that went viral, and then we could build off of that. So you should probably just take your best thoughts and then make a Substack and write essays and hopefully those go viral.
And then, you know, me and you write essays. Not every single one hits it out of the park, obviously, but thats okay. You dont want to spend five years writing stuff that doesnt hit it out of the park and then you get nowhere. You put the good stuff out first and maybe, while youre doing something else, get it out there. You know, an underrated thing is just to make money. And then like give yourself a few years where you can just live off savings or whatever, and then try it, right? If youre just 18 and you dont have a job and you dont have any savings or anything, just becoming a Substack writer full time is probably not realistic. But yeah, there are paths open.
Im more interested in politics than you. So I write more directly political stuff. So maybe for me, think tank would have been a more realistic option.
Well, for you, if you just want to do evolutionary psych or whatever and you dont have theres not many think tanks doing that. So thats another thing.
Rob:I think there is, yeah, I remember at one point early in my PhD, like, oh, maybe Ill go the think tank route. But yeah, its not what I was interested in. And yeah, especially psychology, research-related stuff, its not that popular at most think tanks. But I do think what you said before about, if you have a couple of viral hits, you can build off of it. But I think a lot of writers, especially young writers, sort of enter this state of thinking paralysis where, because Ive seen this happen, Ive seen good Substacks where someone will write one or two or maybe three really good posts and then the website just goes dark and then theyre in hibernation and they just stop updating and I think they believe that, oh, if this next post isnt a hit, if I dont meet or exceed the last post, then Im a failure.
I think there is, yeah, I remember at one point early in my PhD, like, oh, maybe Ill go the think tank route. But yeah, its not what I was interested in. And yeah, especially psychology, research-related stuff, its not that popular at most think tanks. But I do think what you said before about, if you have a couple of viral hits, you can build off of it. But I think a lot of writers, especially young writers, sort of enter this state of thinking paralysis where, because Ive seen this happen, Ive seen good Substacks where someone will write one or two or maybe three really good posts and then the website just goes dark and then theyre in hibernation and they just stop updating and I think they believe that, oh, if this next post isnt a hit, if I dont meet or exceed the last post, then Im a failure.
But I actually think theres a lot to be said for just volume because when I started my Mailchimp thing, I look at the early first year that I was writing, it wasnt that good. It was okay. You could kind of tell it was like some raw, sort of unformed thoughts and undeveloped stuff. Some of this was developed and some of it was interesting, but a lot of it was not that great. But I just kept going with it week after week. I would put something out. Every Sunday I just wrote something. Regardless of how confident I was in the writing, I just thought this is interesting, Im just going to put it out there, why not?
And if you write 52 posts a year versus writing six posts a year, odds are youre just going to build a larger following just through sheer volume, right? 52 posts and some percentage of those will do very well versus if you only write six, youre just going to have a lower opportunity, lower likelihood of finding an audience and a lower likelihood of those people sharing things and so on. And so I think its worth just sort of going through and sticking through this mechanical process of Im just going to write something every week, regardless of how good it is or if I think its going to be this home run post, most of the things I write, I dont really think theyre going to go viral or do that well.
I mean, I have a moderate level of confidence in them and I think theyre pretty good posts and I stand by them, but I dont usually try to engineer virality or think that this is going to be the thing that makes the Substack and garners a thousand new subscribers or something.
Rob:Its better to just write and keep going with it and stick with it and stick with the process. Theres something to be said for not glamorizing writing. I dont think its that glamorous. I think its just, you know, people have this image of a writer. They think of like Hemingway or they think of some smart guy with a pipe sitting in a cafe in Paris or something. When really youre just like sitting in your gym shorts in an apartment in Van Nuys or something. The average writer is just like a dude hanging out in his kitchen with his coffee and just typing something up, reacting to the news or thinking about something he read.
Its better to just write and keep going with it and stick with it and stick with the process. Theres something to be said for not glamorizing writing. I dont think its that glamorous. I think its just, you know, people have this image of a writer. They think of like Hemingway or they think of some smart guy with a pipe sitting in a cafe in Paris or something. When really youre just like sitting in your gym shorts in an apartment in Van Nuys or something. The average writer is just like a dude hanging out in his kitchen with his coffee and just typing something up, reacting to the news or thinking about something he read.
I dont think its like this, people elevate writing too much. I also hate this this is like a side tangent but I also hate when writers do this thing where theyre like, Im so grateful because writing is the only thing Ive ever been good at. And thats the only profession where people say this. Writing is the only thing Ive ever been good at. And to me, its like, its just weird, no one says that about any other career field, right?
Like, firefighting is the only thing Ive ever been good at, or math is the only thing Ive ever been good at. Its only writers who feel this weird need to pat themselves on the back. And I dont know, I just think theres too much mystique and mythical glamour around the profession.
Richard:Well, because firefighters dont write. Writers write. So there may be firefighters, if they did write essays, would say firefighting is the only thing that Im good at.
Well, because firefighters dont write. Writers write. So there may be firefighters, if they did write essays, would say firefighting is the only thing that Im good at.
Rob:But firefighters dont say that, right? If you communicate with anyone in any other profession, teachers dont say teachings the only thing Ive ever been good at.
But firefighters dont say that, right? If you communicate with anyone in any other profession, teachers dont say teachings the only thing Ive ever been good at.
Richard:Well, they say its my passion, its my calling. People will say stuff like that.
Well, they say its my passion, its my calling. People will say stuff like that.
Rob:Its only writers who say, If I didnt write, I dont know what I would do. Its like, you would find something to do.
Its only writers who say, If I didnt write, I dont know what I would do. Its like, you would find something to do.
Richard:Yeah, but the consistency thing is key. When you say these Substack writers, youre like, oh, theyre afraid things are not going to I dont know if its even that. I think its that this is a self-starting job. No one is giving you, this is the problem with academia. Academia is sort of self-starting too. This is why people take nine years to get their PhD because they just sit there. And I think, I know your time is sort of very regimented, I can tell. But these kids, because when youre getting your PhD, you have to sort of write on your own.
Yeah, but the consistency thing is key. When you say these Substack writers, youre like, oh, theyre afraid things are not going to I dont know if its even that. I think its that this is a self-starting job. No one is giving you, this is the problem with academia. Academia is sort of self-starting too. This is why people take nine years to get their PhD because they just sit there. And I think, I know your time is sort of very regimented, I can tell. But these kids, because when youre getting your PhD, you have to sort of write on your own.
So if youre not, no boss is going to be breathing down your neck. And its much more like, at least in academia you have a schedule and a normal kind of routine. But with this, this is your complete life, you have to be a 100% self-starter. And thats not going to be for everyone.
When you say dont glamorize, romanticize writing. Actually I do romanticize what I do. People come up to me, Im sure people come up to you too, and theyre like, Oh my God, I love your stuff, I was talking to somebody I know and youre influencing young people, and did this and that. And thats romantic. Whats more romantic than that? I dont think that because I wear gym shorts, it doesnt mean...
Rob:Okay, that part of it is, but Im talking about the process of it, like, Oh, Im going to have my muse, Im going to be in the cafe at Paris and the muse is going to come and Im going to like, beautiful thoughts are going to come. And its like, Im talking about the process itself, you just need to sit down and write things down, okay?
Okay, that part of it is, but Im talking about the process of it, like, Oh, Im going to have my muse, Im going to be in the cafe at Paris and the muse is going to come and Im going to like, beautiful thoughts are going to come. And its like, Im talking about the process itself, you just need to sit down and write things down, okay?
Richard:But that happens to me. Like Ill see a beautiful woman or something. Or Ill see a happy child playing and Ill be like, I have an idea that I want to express to the world. You dont have those sort of eureka moments? Like this is something in life that gets at something?
But that happens to me. Like Ill see a beautiful woman or something. Or Ill see a happy child playing and Ill be like, I have an idea that I want to express to the world. You dont have those sort of eureka moments? Like this is something in life that gets at something?
Rob:Okay, I do. Yeah, I think thats also maybe decent advice for aspiring writers is to just anytime you have a halfway interesting thought or anything thats half baked, but has promise, to always write it down. I have the note taking app in my phone. I have the recording app on my phone, sometimes I will just dictate notes as Im walking. Or on the go or on the train or whatever to just jot things down, even if theyre, whatever, just like if its something about it that lingers or sticks, Ill always write it down. But I dont think of that as this magical thing. Like the muse came to me and delivered this nugget. Im just like, oh, cool thing that Im thinking about. Let me write it down or whatever.
Okay, I do. Yeah, I think thats also maybe decent advice for aspiring writers is to just anytime you have a halfway interesting thought or anything thats half baked, but has promise, to always write it down. I have the note taking app in my phone. I have the recording app on my phone, sometimes I will just dictate notes as Im walking. Or on the go or on the train or whatever to just jot things down, even if theyre, whatever, just like if its something about it that lingers or sticks, Ill always write it down. But I dont think of that as this magical thing. Like the muse came to me and delivered this nugget. Im just like, oh, cool thing that Im thinking about. Let me write it down or whatever.
Richard:Whats magical? You have to sit in a cafe in Paris? If youre doing it in San Bernardino, it doesnt count?
Whats magical? You have to sit in a cafe in Paris? If youre doing it in San Bernardino, it doesnt count?
Rob:No, it doesnt count in Paris either. Like thats not what writing is to me. I just think writing is a job like any other. Its cool to get the reactions and stuff. Yeah, like people come up, Yeah, I really like this essay bro, or This really changed the way I think about things or whatever. That part is nice. But as far as the process itself, accept that it is mostly just like a routine, like going to the gym.
No, it doesnt count in Paris either. Like thats not what writing is to me. I just think writing is a job like any other. Its cool to get the reactions and stuff. Yeah, like people come up, Yeah, I really like this essay bro, or This really changed the way I think about things or whatever. That part is nice. But as far as the process itself, accept that it is mostly just like a routine, like going to the gym.
Like I dont think you should glamorize going to the gym either. Its just, you go there, you do the thing, and you do it enough times and magic will sometimes appear. Or you know, gradually youll get better at the craft or youll look better with your shirt off, just sticking with that routine, but dont make it this, I dont know. I just think theres too much romance and glamour and allure around the job of being a writer, I think its not like that.
Richard:Man, maybe I just love romance. I mean, I just love romance. I think going to the gym is romantic. I see the girls, theyre, you know, my wife was [laughter] I keep talking about looking at girls.
Man, maybe I just love romance. I mean, I just love romance. I think going to the gym is romantic. I see the girls, theyre, you know, my wife was [laughter] I keep talking about looking at girls.
Rob:I see the yoga pants, I see the sports bras. [laughter]
I see the yoga pants, I see the sports bras. [laughter]
Richard:Yes. And its like, theyre trying, theyre out there and theyre struggling. My wife was telling me she was in the gym and shes like, Why do the girls do this? Theyre taking pictures of their butts. Theyre in the mirror and theyre sticking out their butts. And I just see the evolutionary psychology. Its like you could write an article on that, right? It is cool. I just think, life is cool. And yeah, so a lot of people arent trying. They dont have thoughts. Theyre not expressing things to the world. Theyre not going to the gym. Theyre not bettering themselves. I think this is actually, this is maybe a philosophical thing.
Yes. And its like, theyre trying, theyre out there and theyre struggling. My wife was telling me she was in the gym and shes like, Why do the girls do this? Theyre taking pictures of their butts. Theyre in the mirror and theyre sticking out their butts. And I just see the evolutionary psychology. Its like you could write an article on that, right? It is cool. I just think, life is cool. And yeah, so a lot of people arent trying. They dont have thoughts. Theyre not expressing things to the world. Theyre not going to the gym. Theyre not bettering themselves. I think this is actually, this is maybe a philosophical thing.
Youre like, bring it down to its essentials and Im like, no, be idealistic and see everything as sort of beautiful and romantic. And I dont know, that works for me. Maybe the opposite sort of works for you.
Rob:Yeah, I dont know. I dont think creative jobs are that way. I think its mostly just mechanical, its doing the work, its showing up. I guess the main point that I was trying to make around the romantic thing is a lot of people, a lot of early writers, people who are less experienced believe I can only write when Im inspired, when the point Im making is, if you sit down and follow the routine, sometimes inspiration will hit you, but you have to sit down and be ready for it.
Yeah, I dont know. I dont think creative jobs are that way. I think its mostly just mechanical, its doing the work, its showing up. I guess the main point that I was trying to make around the romantic thing is a lot of people, a lot of early writers, people who are less experienced believe I can only write when Im inspired, when the point Im making is, if you sit down and follow the routine, sometimes inspiration will hit you, but you have to sit down and be ready for it.
Rather than wait for it to strike you, because some people theyll write but they only do it when they feel like it and I dont think it works that way, I think you have to write on a daily or weekly basis and just put in the reps, do the volume, and the posts will come or whatever, one out of every 10 and whatever, every 20, will truly grab people. But I dont think like, oh, I only write when I feel like it, so you only write once a month or every other month, and its just not going to work out in the same way for you.
Richard:Maybe this makes me a little bit different from others, because I always feel like it. I really sort of have this itch that Im always sort of needing to get out. So the motivation has never been a question for me. So maybe some people do need the
Maybe this makes me a little bit different from others, because I always feel like it. I really sort of have this itch that Im always sort of needing to get out. So the motivation has never been a question for me. So maybe some people do need the
But I feel like I have that motivation because I have this romantic ideal. Like this next article is going to own all the people who are stupid and its going to like influence the world and make the world a better place and give people revelations. Like the fact that Im just believing that about everything I say or write makes it actually inspiring and it gives me that So yeah, I think theres interesting psychology, something psychologically thats a difference, but somehow we both are able to write a lot.
Rob:Because I would say most of the time when I sit down to write I actually dont really feel like it. But once I get started, then its almost like the gym. I think the gym is actually a decent analogy here where like a lot of the times I dont feel like going, but once Im there, Im ready to go. And I can get into it and its fine. And with writing, its the same where like, oh, I have to put out a post this Sunday, or whatever. And so Ill sit down and Im not in a mood for it or its not working for me, but then Ill review some notes or look at some things Ive dictated or whatever. And itll slowly come to me or some thoughts or whatever and gradually the process will sort of unfold, but its not something that that I always enjoy doing.
Because I would say most of the time when I sit down to write I actually dont really feel like it. But once I get started, then its almost like the gym. I think the gym is actually a decent analogy here where like a lot of the times I dont feel like going, but once Im there, Im ready to go. And I can get into it and its fine. And with writing, its the same where like, oh, I have to put out a post this Sunday, or whatever. And so Ill sit down and Im not in a mood for it or its not working for me, but then Ill review some notes or look at some things Ive dictated or whatever. And itll slowly come to me or some thoughts or whatever and gradually the process will sort of unfold, but its not something that that I always enjoy doing.
Richard:Yeah. You know what? I just had an inspiration moment. Just as a writer, Ive just had an inspirational moment. I want to write an article on these ideas that weve just been batting back and forth because I think we got at something much broader than the question of writing and becoming a public intellectual. I think were getting at the question of like, what actually motivates people? What motivates people or me or you on a daily basis just to be doing the things that you want to be doing? I think thats fascinating. And maybe youre the more normal kind psychologically, maybe what youre doing is more usual, its what most people do. But theres, I think I just feel like when I listen to you, I feel like I have a different way of interacting with my work and just interacting with the world. And we talked about the gym, you say sometimes I dont feel like it. And I just feel like I cant wait to get to the gym. I just really want to get to the gym. Like it has to be like that, because Im almost incapable of doing anything I dont feel like doing. I really need to want to do something. But luckily I want to do things that are good for me, like write articles and go to the gym, right?
Yeah. You know what? I just had an inspiration moment. Just as a writer, Ive just had an inspirational moment. I want to write an article on these ideas that weve just been batting back and forth because I think we got at something much broader than the question of writing and becoming a public intellectual. I think were getting at the question of like, what actually motivates people? What motivates people or me or you on a daily basis just to be doing the things that you want to be doing? I think thats fascinating. And maybe youre the more normal kind psychologically, maybe what youre doing is more usual, its what most people do. But theres, I think I just feel like when I listen to you, I feel like I have a different way of interacting with my work and just interacting with the world. And we talked about the gym, you say sometimes I dont feel like it. And I just feel like I cant wait to get to the gym. I just really want to get to the gym. Like it has to be like that, because Im almost incapable of doing anything I dont feel like doing. I really need to want to do something. But luckily I want to do things that are good for me, like write articles and go to the gym, right?
Rob:Thats true, yeah, I have to exert a lot of self-discipline. Like if I only did what I wanted, I dont know. I think I would, you know, watch TV and probably, well, I dont know, probably is a strong word, but I wouldnt necessarily be in a relationship. I would just be less committed to any particular person and I would just be less focused and committed to anything really like whether relationships or work or anything, gym routines, it would be much more scattered.
Thats true, yeah, I have to exert a lot of self-discipline. Like if I only did what I wanted, I dont know. I think I would, you know, watch TV and probably, well, I dont know, probably is a strong word, but I wouldnt necessarily be in a relationship. I would just be less committed to any particular person and I would just be less focused and committed to anything really like whether relationships or work or anything, gym routines, it would be much more scattered.
But the fact that I know whats good for me, and I know whats required to get those things, and so I just force myself to do them. Because I do have those moments where sometimes, every once in a while, inspiration will strike, and I love that feeling. Its just an amazing, and Im jealous if you really do feel that all the time, its just an incredible feeling of you have an idea, you know what youre going to say, you sit down and you write it and you type it up, and its just being in that flow state, it does to some extent feel like magic. And maybe for some people, maybe this is a psychological difference where some people, it makes sense to glamorize because it does feel like a very romantic act when you tap into that part of the mind and its all flowing together.
But most of the time for me and probably for most people, I think, maybe not most writers, I think many writers write because they enjoy it. But a lot of people, they do it and its not working and you just keep going with it and sticking with it. And sometimes good things can happen. Yeah, that is interesting. I mean, so every time you write, do you feel that sort of inspiration?
Richard:Yeah, I mean, I have more things that Im inspired to say than I have time to write them all up. So it doesnt mean I can work unlimited, because I eventually get headaches. So I have to take breaks. Like if I write two days straight, Ill just get a headache and Ill have to just chill out for a day. So thats the limiting factor. Its just, I overwork myself, but as soon as Im recovered, yeah, I go right back into the flow.
Yeah, I mean, I have more things that Im inspired to say than I have time to write them all up. So it doesnt mean I can work unlimited, because I eventually get headaches. So I have to take breaks. Like if I write two days straight, Ill just get a headache and Ill have to just chill out for a day. So thats the limiting factor. Its just, I overwork myself, but as soon as Im recovered, yeah, I go right back into the flow.
Rob:Wow. Yeah, that is not, I mean, I have this fantasy in my mind of like someday, maybe as soon as this year, depending on how things turn out, where I can actually stop writing for a while. I took a break for the first time earlier this year. I took like a month off of my Substack and it was just really nice. By the time the month ended, I was actually ready to get back to writing. But for the first like two weeks of that month, I was like, this is so freeing, so liberating to not have to post anything.
Wow. Yeah, that is not, I mean, I have this fantasy in my mind of like someday, maybe as soon as this year, depending on how things turn out, where I can actually stop writing for a while. I took a break for the first time earlier this year. I took like a month off of my Substack and it was just really nice. By the time the month ended, I was actually ready to get back to writing. But for the first like two weeks of that month, I was like, this is so freeing, so liberating to not have to post anything.
Richard:No, I hate it. Like my wife makes me take vacations and it drives me crazy. I still try to focus on, you know, I have kids too. And its just, I cant get away. I try to tweet.
No, I hate it. Like my wife makes me take vacations and it drives me crazy. I still try to focus on, you know, I have kids too. And its just, I cant get away. I try to tweet.
Rob:Daddys Substacking. [laughter] Yeah, thats interesting. So yeah, maybe our advice to basically understand who you are before you decide which persons advice to implement.
Daddys Substacking. [laughter] Yeah, thats interesting. So yeah, maybe our advice to basically understand who you are before you decide which persons advice to implement.
Richard:Yeah, thats true. And also, I think that me and you are maybe very distant from other people and should premise all of this by saying you have to be very, very self-motivated.
Yeah, thats true. And also, I think that me and you are maybe very distant from other people and should premise all of this by saying you have to be very, very self-motivated.
If youre not at like the top 1%, were both probably top 1% of self-motivated, even if we have these psychological differences. And so, if youre not but youre thinking about being an academic, youre going to have to be very self-motivated too. So its like, if youre even thinking about academia, you might have the ability to do this thing on your own. But yeah, thats true.
Rob:So we mentioned before a lot of other Substack writers, many of them had institutional affiliations, but of the ones who didnt, so you mentioned me, you, and Razib, all of us, so yeah, Razib was in a PhD program, hes been writing for a long time. I do wonder if youre on that sort of academic track, and you have a Substack, those two things are similar in some ways, where you basically have a lot of unstructured time and you have to impose the structure on yourself to get things done.
So we mentioned before a lot of other Substack writers, many of them had institutional affiliations, but of the ones who didnt, so you mentioned me, you, and Razib, all of us, so yeah, Razib was in a PhD program, hes been writing for a long time. I do wonder if youre on that sort of academic track, and you have a Substack, those two things are similar in some ways, where you basically have a lot of unstructured time and you have to impose the structure on yourself to get things done.
And so yeah, it wouldnt surprise me if a lot of successful Substackers were, they either have a PhD or were PhD students or just like at one point had academia as a sort of goal for themselves and youve learned how to do that.
Richard:Yeah, thats Freddie too. Thats Freddie. And Erik Hoel, I think he quit academia. I think he found Substack better. Because it is many of the same talents. Its the same kind of just ability to motivate yourself and have new things to say. Yeah, everyone, they either start out academics or journalists, like a lot of them were just journalists.
Yeah, thats Freddie too. Thats Freddie. And Erik Hoel, I think he quit academia. I think he found Substack better. Because it is many of the same talents. Its the same kind of just ability to motivate yourself and have new things to say. Yeah, everyone, they either start out academics or journalists, like a lot of them were just journalists.
Scott Alexander, he was just a psychiatrist who had a blog. Its hard to think of many people who have a normal person job and then became a major independent writer. I dont think of all the people I read... Yeah, I dont think anyones like that. So yeah, journalist is like the same thing too because, or an op-ed writer, its unstructured time that youre sort of focusing on your interests. So yeah, academic, journalist, Substacker, theyre sort of the same category. If youve never thought about any of these jobs, its probably not for you to be a public intellectual.
Rob:One thing I love about Substack is just the immediate reward of you write a post, you put it online, and then immediately the feedback and the response and the comments and everything starts flowing in. Whereas for writing a research paper or an academic paper, it could be two to four years, sometimes more, before you get a response from peer reviewers, and going through that process and getting it published. By the time its published, your interests have changed, you know, your mind is elsewhere.
One thing I love about Substack is just the immediate reward of you write a post, you put it online, and then immediately the feedback and the response and the comments and everything starts flowing in. Whereas for writing a research paper or an academic paper, it could be two to four years, sometimes more, before you get a response from peer reviewers, and going through that process and getting it published. By the time its published, your interests have changed, you know, your mind is elsewhere.
And so its hard to retain that level of enthusiasm. And then for writing books, its kind of the same where I hated writing my thesis. I didnt like writing my book. It was really painful. And then by the time it comes out, its just years later. Whereas for Substack, even like first, you have something on your mind. You get to say it as long or as short as you want. And then you get to see the reaction to it.
When you write your Substack post, do you have a target word count in mind or do you not even think about that? You just write it and see where it goes?
Richard:No, no, never. That is one of the big advantages, because everything else youre writing for, you write for a magazine, you have a target word count, you write for an academic paper, you have to meet the word count. I find that one of the most restraining things. Some things I just want to say in 5,000 words, some things I just want to say in a few hundred. Its, yeah, I usually dont. Sometimes Ill be like, okay, this is a big idea, so it deserves a longer treatment.
No, no, never. That is one of the big advantages, because everything else youre writing for, you write for a magazine, you have a target word count, you write for an academic paper, you have to meet the word count. I find that one of the most restraining things. Some things I just want to say in 5,000 words, some things I just want to say in a few hundred. Its, yeah, I usually dont. Sometimes Ill be like, okay, this is a big idea, so it deserves a longer treatment.
So I will do that. Or sometimes Ill be like, oh, this is just a small idea, Ive just barely started to think about it. And so, Ill have ranges, but no, I dont say, oh, this is going to be 3,500 words. I definitely dont.
Rob:I find it harder now to write for legacy media outlets like op-eds or like right now Im working on some excerpts and adaptations of my book for theBoston Globeor some other outlets. And yeah, they have all of these little requirements and stylistic concerns and the editors have their own way of thinking about writing and doing things. And, you know, I dont know if Ive become a bit spoiled or what, but its just really obnoxious to me.
I find it harder now to write for legacy media outlets like op-eds or like right now Im working on some excerpts and adaptations of my book for the
or some other outlets. And yeah, they have all of these little requirements and stylistic concerns and the editors have their own way of thinking about writing and doing things. And, you know, I dont know if Ive become a bit spoiled or what, but its just really obnoxious to me.
All of these sort of nitpicky comments and requests and stuff, because I know when I read on Substack theres an audience there and people like it and people, they like to have a little bit of stylistic verve or some quirks or something that gives a sense of this isnt some like bureaucratized sanitized thing. This isnt corporatized. This is a person sharing their thoughts with you directly, without the interference of other hands and other people and so I find it a little bit more annoying actually to write for legacy outlets. Do you find that too?
Richard:Yeah, I cant write for like, Ive had some offers now and then, if its likeNew York Timesor theAtlantic, which, you know, isnt going to happen anymore. But they used toNew York Timesused to talk to me.
Yeah, I cant write for like, Ive had some offers now and then, if its like
or the
, which, you know, isnt going to happen anymore. But they used to
used to talk to me.
Rob:They dont want to publish Richard Hoste? [laughter]
They dont want to publish Richard Hoste? [laughter]
Richard:No, they dont. They dont. You know, there was a time where I was really in contact with a lot of these publications and they really wanted to. And I think it was it was before that, actually, it was because of my Twitter, I think when Elon took over, I felt a little bit freer to talk about like race and crime. And I think thats when it became, sort of impossible. But anyways, it doesnt matter. Like I could write for like, lesser publications.
No, they dont. They dont. You know, there was a time where I was really in contact with a lot of these publications and they really wanted to. And I think it was it was before that, actually, it was because of my Twitter, I think when Elon took over, I felt a little bit freer to talk about like race and crime. And I think thats when it became, sort of impossible. But anyways, it doesnt matter. Like I could write for like, lesser publications.
And I dont, actually, I do have athing coming out.Its probably, it might be published by the time people listen to this, but I couldnt turn it down because it was just so funny. I wrote something about circumcision on Twitter. And then this homosexual magazine reached out to me, actually a bisexual magazine. And they were like, you want to write some anti-circumcision thing for us? And Im like, okay, will you pay me?, and theyre like, yeah and Im like, okay. So theres going to be an anti-circumcision, in a gay magazine, which is just funny.
And I dont, actually, I do have a
Its probably, it might be published by the time people listen to this, but I couldnt turn it down because it was just so funny. I wrote something about circumcision on Twitter. And then this homosexual magazine reached out to me, actually a bisexual magazine. And they were like, you want to write some anti-circumcision thing for us? And Im like, okay, will you pay me?, and theyre like, yeah and Im like, okay. So theres going to be an anti-circumcision, in a gay magazine, which is just funny.
Rob:Wait, whats it called? Whats the magazine? Are you allowed to say?
Wait, whats it called? Whats the magazine? Are you allowed to say?
Richard:Oh my god, I forgot what this thing is called. Its called bi-monthly or something. [laughter]
Oh my god, I forgot what this thing is called. Its called bi-monthly or something. [laughter]
No, its not bi-monthly. Its, hold on, let me look at my email because its very embarrassing that I dont remember what this is because I was just talking to them this morning. Theyre about to publish it. Its the Queer Majority.
Rob:Okay, interesting. So Im seeing this go around, Cory Clark I think wrote something for them recently. Im seeing like other kind of, I dont know what you want to call them, heterodox or IDW adjacent people.
Okay, interesting. So Im seeing this go around, Cory Clark I think wrote something for them recently. Im seeing like other kind of, I dont know what you want to call them, heterodox or IDW adjacent people.
Richard:Oh yeah, Im looking at their contributor site. Im looking at their website. They have Helen Pluckrose, Michael Bailey, so people, names we know.
Oh yeah, Im looking at their contributor site. Im looking at their website. They have Helen Pluckrose, Michael Bailey, so people, names we know.
Rob:Okay. So theyre like heterodox,Quillette, IDW kind of magazine. Its really interesting. These are like, disgruntled gays who are like fed up with the woke agenda or something.
Okay. So theyre like heterodox,
, IDW kind of magazine. Its really interesting. These are like, disgruntled gays who are like fed up with the woke agenda or something.
Richard:Oh, Matt McManus, that guys always calling me a fascist on Twitter. Thats funny, he writes for this thing too.
Oh, Matt McManus, that guys always calling me a fascist on Twitter. Thats funny, he writes for this thing too.
Rob:Arent you a libertarian? I dont know about the fascism.
Arent you a libertarian? I dont know about the fascism.
Richard:Well, I mean, actually Im being unfair. He just sort of dunks on me sometimes, but yeah. Our friend Wilfred is there too. Yeah. So its a lot of that crowd. Exactly. Colin Wright.
Well, I mean, actually Im being unfair. He just sort of dunks on me sometimes, but yeah. Our friend Wilfred is there too. Yeah. So its a lot of that crowd. Exactly. Colin Wright.
Rob:That sounds like a lot of straights, its like a queer majority, but it actually sounds like a heterosexual majority.
That sounds like a lot of straights, its like a queer majority, but it actually sounds like a heterosexual majority.
Richard:I think they told me that their theory is that like everyone is bi. And so thats why its called queer majority. And Im just editing it right now, hoping they dont put like, you know
I think they told me that their theory is that like everyone is bi. And so thats why its called queer majority. And Im just editing it right now, hoping they dont put like, you know
Rob:were all secretly gay.
were all secretly gay.
Richard:Im also bisexual. [laughter]
Im also bisexual. [laughter]
Rob:Richard Hanania is a closet homosexual. [laughter]
Richard Hanania is a closet homosexual. [laughter]
Richard:No, but I like trolling the right-wing trads. Im like, yes, Im going to write this thing. Its just trolling. And with the Jewish thing, its also funny, circumcision.
No, but I like trolling the right-wing trads. Im like, yes, Im going to write this thing. Its just trolling. And with the Jewish thing, its also funny, circumcision.
Rob:Youre going to get some backlash, youre...
Youre going to get some backlash, youre...
Richard:Yeah, I write for the backlash. I write for the drama, for something thats going to make me chuckle. So thats why Im doing this thing.
Yeah, I write for the backlash. I write for the drama, for something thats going to make me chuckle. So thats why Im doing this thing.
Rob:Yeah. You know what the best is, when you write something already for your Substack and then some outlet is basically like, can we republish this? and maybe theyll make a few sort of stylistic edits or whatever, but like theyll just pay you and they just repost it somewhere else. And Im like, thats the nicest feeling in the world where you already have it written and you dont have to, whatever, shave off the cool, interesting parts.
Yeah. You know what the best is, when you write something already for your Substack and then some outlet is basically like, can we republish this? and maybe theyll make a few sort of stylistic edits or whatever, but like theyll just pay you and they just repost it somewhere else. And Im like, thats the nicest feeling in the world where you already have it written and you dont have to, whatever, shave off the cool, interesting parts.
Richard:Yeah. Ive never had something just taken straight. Ive had to write a new version.
Yeah. Ive never had something just taken straight. Ive had to write a new version.
Rob:Well, your post that got republished inQuillette, right? Like thats something, you know, things like that. So youve had, yeah, if likeQuilletteor theFree Pressor some outlet basically says we like this and well just maybe make a couple of changes and if youre okay with it, well just rerun it. And thats a nice feeling. Yeah.
Well, your post that got republished in
, right? Like thats something, you know, things like that. So youve had, yeah, if like
or the
or some outlet basically says we like this and well just maybe make a couple of changes and if youre okay with it, well just rerun it. And thats a nice feeling. Yeah.
Richard:Yeah, by the way, we should talk about, so the op-eds that Ive had, the one onWashington Postcame from a Twitter thread. They just reached out to me, they saw this Twitter thread and they said, you want to write this thing on anAmerican Civil War?New York Times, theone op-ed I hadcame from my Substack on experts. So they just saw the Substack and said, do you want to write for us? So just writing Twitter threads and Substacks actually can get the attention of mainstream media and get your work out there.
Yeah, by the way, we should talk about, so the op-eds that Ive had, the one on
came from a Twitter thread. They just reached out to me, they saw this Twitter thread and they said, you want to write this thing on an

, the
came from my Substack on experts. So they just saw the Substack and said, do you want to write for us? So just writing Twitter threads and Substacks actually can get the attention of mainstream media and get your work out there.
How do you think about Twitter in these contexts? Were both tweeting a lot. I think its great for getting attention out there. I think Twitter and Substack used to be much more complimentary than they are now just because its hard to transfer as much from Twitter to Substack. But I think it just sort of keeps you in the conversation. I feel like it reminds people youre there. And I think that just getting to know people. A lot of people just DM me or I DM them and then we become friends. Any thoughts on how you use Twitter?
Rob:Yeah, I mean, it wasnt conscious initially. Like I didnt think, oh, Im going to use Twitter to build a career, but then it kind of, you know, my career basically kind of developed out of it.
Yeah, I mean, it wasnt conscious initially. Like I didnt think, oh, Im going to use Twitter to build a career, but then it kind of, you know, my career basically kind of developed out of it.
Yeah, and so tweeting a lot, getting on peoples radar, building connections. And yeah, Ive met a lot of interesting people from Twitter, like professors, academics, journalists, you and I connected on Twitter. Thereve been a lot of people Ive met through Twitter. And yeah, its like a way when you tweet or say things, youre basically kind of subcommunicating, like Im alive and here I am. And, youre sort of signaling to the world what your interests are.
Theres this great post actually from a couple of years ago by Byrne Hobart who wrote,Writing Is Networking for Introverts.And Im not exactly an introvert, but I think a lot of writers are introverts. Im kind of in the middle. Like I think I scored 60th percentile on extroversion. So like Im not super extroverted.
Theres this great post actually from a couple of years ago by Byrne Hobart who wrote,
And Im not exactly an introvert, but I think a lot of writers are introverts. Im kind of in the middle. Like I think I scored 60th percentile on extroversion. So like Im not super extroverted.
But I think a lot of writers are more introverted in orientation, but Twitter is a way to basically network without networking and put your name out there, put your tweets out there, build connections. And then wherever you go, whatever city youre in, you know there will be people for you that are interested in your stuff and you can connect with, once the audience starts to build and develop and so on.
So theNew York Times, I kind of had this weird connection with them from before I even was really that much on Twitter. But theWall Street Journal, it was like that. The very first article I wroteabout veteransand the reception on campus, some of that was through Twitter. The next post I wrote for them, yeah. SoWall Street Journal, basically, it was through some of the tweets that I had written. And its a kind of like a proof of concept almost, where you write a tweet or maybe a Twitter thread and it gets some attention and then you can just show this to an editor.
So the
, I kind of had this weird connection with them from before I even was really that much on Twitter. But the
, it was like that. The very first article I wrote
and the reception on campus, some of that was through Twitter. The next post I wrote for them, yeah. So
, basically, it was through some of the tweets that I had written. And its a kind of like a proof of concept almost, where you write a tweet or maybe a Twitter thread and it gets some attention and then you can just show this to an editor.
And this is also like the very first thing I ever wrote for theNew York Postworked the same way. I wrote this Twitter thread and then they actually contacted me, kind of like what you were describing before with theWashington Postand some of these other outlets. They came to me and said, hey, we saw this Twitter thread, would you like to turn this into an op-ed?
And this is also like the very first thing I ever wrote for the
worked the same way. I wrote this Twitter thread and then they actually contacted me, kind of like what you were describing before with the
and some of these other outlets. They came to me and said, hey, we saw this Twitter thread, would you like to turn this into an op-ed?
So Twitter does sort of introduce opportunities. I think, yeah. And it still works that way. Unlike what you and I were describing with Substack where there may be a little bit of a saturation thing. I dont think Twitters like that. I think Twitter is still a way, its still kind of like this digital water cooler where you can go and meet interesting people and editors still kind of scour the site looking for fresh content.
And thats the other thing. I know there is like among the right, especially, they think like, oh, they only want to publish other elites, and they only have a narrow-minded viewpoint and so on. And theres a little bit of that, but I think its less so than a lot of the conservative people think, where whenever I speak to editors at prestige media outlets, they do ask me, do you know any young people who have interesting thoughts and maybe they arent so progressive or what have you? They want to know. Like, obviously, but within bounds, right? If youre tweeting the N-word over and over, theyre not going to be interested.
Even if you have other interesting tweets, but you have to be semi-respectable as a person so dont go crazy like if you want to get an op-ed in theWall Street JournalorWashington Postor something like that, dont be a lunatic on Twitter.
Even if you have other interesting tweets, but you have to be semi-respectable as a person so dont go crazy like if you want to get an op-ed in the
or
or something like that, dont be a lunatic on Twitter.
Richard:Yeah. And by the way, getting an op-ed, people shouldnt see that, like, I didnt get much. I think you mightve had, your experience mightve been different, but I didnt have an uptick in subscribers from theNew York TimesorWashington Post. That didnt really matter to me. Didnt you become famous sort of through theNew York Times, you were doing something with your, wasnt that how you first got your name out there?
Yeah. And by the way, getting an op-ed, people shouldnt see that, like, I didnt get much. I think you mightve had, your experience mightve been different, but I didnt have an uptick in subscribers from the
or
. That didnt really matter to me. Didnt you become famous sort of through the
, you were doing something with your, wasnt that how you first got your name out there?
Rob:I mean, I dont know, okay, I did get the book deal through an op-ed in theNew York Times, but then
I mean, I dont know, okay, I did get the book deal through an op-ed in the
, but then
Richard:So thats a big deal to turn that into a book deal, yeah?
So thats a big deal to turn that into a book deal, yeah?
Rob:Well, I mean, it was a mix. To clarify the story slightly more than that, where I wrote an op-ed in theNew York Timesin 2018 and I got a literary agent and I didnt actually sign with a publisher until two years later in 2020 when I had built an audience. So yeah, but the agencies, like they will sign you and will basically put you in a perpetual state of limbo if publishers arent interested in you. So I actually had to build the audience over the course of that two years on Twitter and on my newsletter and so on, so that by the time 2020 rolled around, we finally were able to get some meetings with publishers who were interested in potentially doing a book.
Well, I mean, it was a mix. To clarify the story slightly more than that, where I wrote an op-ed in the
in 2018 and I got a literary agent and I didnt actually sign with a publisher until two years later in 2020 when I had built an audience. So yeah, but the agencies, like they will sign you and will basically put you in a perpetual state of limbo if publishers arent interested in you. So I actually had to build the audience over the course of that two years on Twitter and on my newsletter and so on, so that by the time 2020 rolled around, we finally were able to get some meetings with publishers who were interested in potentially doing a book.
And so, it was a little bit of both where you have to have the op-ed, but then you also have to have an audience, at least in my case. But I think the audience is actually more important than the op-ed. Like if you have an op-ed, but you have no online footprint, unless youre like, unless youre the polyamorous Park Slope mom, then you can get whatever you want. [laughter]
But most of the time youre going to need some kind of audience in place in order to get any kind of book deal attention.
Richard:Yeah, thats right. Yeah, I never had a literary agent. When the publisher, HarperCollins, just reached out to me and someone was like, oh, maybe you should talk to a literary agent. And I just talked to literary agents and Im like, wait, youre going to take 15% and you cant guarantee its going to do anything else? And theyre like, yeah, pretty much. So at that point, it wasnt even worth it to have a literary agent. At least maybe they could have got some better deal or something, I dont know.
Yeah, thats right. Yeah, I never had a literary agent. When the publisher, HarperCollins, just reached out to me and someone was like, oh, maybe you should talk to a literary agent. And I just talked to literary agents and Im like, wait, youre going to take 15% and you cant guarantee its going to do anything else? And theyre like, yeah, pretty much. So at that point, it wasnt even worth it to have a literary agent. At least maybe they could have got some better deal or something, I dont know.
Rob:Did you sign your deal without an agent? Oh, wow. Ok. Yeah, usually they require it. Well, I dont know if its required, but its strongly suggested or whatever.
Did you sign your deal without an agent? Oh, wow. Ok. Yeah, usually they require it. Well, I dont know if its required, but its strongly suggested or whatever.
Richard:Well, what people told me was its basically boilerplate. What you want, the agent will negotiate, will find you the deal and negotiate maybe the advance, but its like, he mightve negotiated me a better advance or not. It was basically, its just like at that point, I think I did the hard part already. I dont know, maybe that was bad advice. I dont know, maybe, but I even talked to some agents. Even they sounded like they were sort of doubtful that they could do much for me at that point. And so even they werent that confident. I was like, okay, I dont need...
Well, what people told me was its basically boilerplate. What you want, the agent will negotiate, will find you the deal and negotiate maybe the advance, but its like, he mightve negotiated me a better advance or not. It was basically, its just like at that point, I think I did the hard part already. I dont know, maybe that was bad advice. I dont know, maybe, but I even talked to some agents. Even they sounded like they were sort of doubtful that they could do much for me at that point. And so even they werent that confident. I was like, okay, I dont need...
Rob:Okay, interesting. Do you think its even at this point where we are right with our followings and our Substacks and everything, would you want to write another book with a traditional book publisher? Or would you just publish your chapters on Substack or publish independently or do some sort of self-publishing or hybrid model or something? Or would you still rather go the traditional route?
Okay, interesting. Do you think its even at this point where we are right with our followings and our Substacks and everything, would you want to write another book with a traditional book publisher? Or would you just publish your chapters on Substack or publish independently or do some sort of self-publishing or hybrid model or something? Or would you still rather go the traditional route?
Richard:Yeah, I dont know. Like I think a book is a way to just sort of plant a flag and say, okay, heres everything I believe on wokeness. Heres everything when I wrote a book on foreign policy. Those are my two books. I may want to do that for something else. Its probably not the financially... I mean, you do have a chance of just really hitting it out of the park, but you also have a chance of just hitting it out of the park with five different Substack articles, whatever the book is going to be.
Yeah, I dont know. Like I think a book is a way to just sort of plant a flag and say, okay, heres everything I believe on wokeness. Heres everything when I wrote a book on foreign policy. Those are my two books. I may want to do that for something else. Its probably not the financially... I mean, you do have a chance of just really hitting it out of the park, but you also have a chance of just hitting it out of the park with five different Substack articles, whatever the book is going to be.
So at this point, I dont know. I lean towards saying probably no. One thing Ive had an offer for is to just publish my Substacks as a book, I just pick the best ones. Bryan Caplan does this now with his blog posts. Hes written like five books just doing that. So maybe Ill do something like that. Maybe that will give like heres Richard Hanania thought on a series of issues so just having that paper, people can put in their hands on it and being on Amazon and all that stuff. Maybe you get the advantage without actually having to write it.
Rob:Steve Sailer has that thing, right? He did something like that recently. Yeah, the compendium of your best hits or something.
Steve Sailer has that thing, right? He did something like that recently. Yeah, the compendium of your best hits or something.
Richard:Yes. Exactly, its with a boutique publisher, I think, the Sailer thing. How about you? I want to write a bio. I mean, you sort of inspire me to write a My life is very interesting. I mean, its a very sort of weird life.
Yes. Exactly, its with a boutique publisher, I think, the Sailer thing. How about you? I want to write a bio. I mean, you sort of inspire me to write a My life is very interesting. I mean, its a very sort of weird life.
Rob:Dude, werent you like you were arrested and you dropped out of high school and like thats pretty unique for a
Dude, werent you like you were arrested and you dropped out of high school and like thats pretty unique for a
Richard:Several times, I was several times. I feel like I could write your story except without the foster care, with two loving parents, but who I hated and wouldnt listen to and tried to be as screwed up as possible.
Several times, I was several times. I feel like I could write your story except without the foster care, with two loving parents, but who I hated and wouldnt listen to and tried to be as screwed up as possible.
Rob:Yeah, I think theres a market for that. I think memoirs are, you know, semi-normal in the sense of like non-celebrity memoirs, I think like those are perennially interesting. Yeah, I think you should consider it.
Yeah, I think theres a market for that. I think memoirs are, you know, semi-normal in the sense of like non-celebrity memoirs, I think like those are perennially interesting. Yeah, I think you should consider it.
Richard:And I think the psychological sort of story is I was basically like a shut-in, like for the first 25 years of my life or so. Like I would have been the last person in the world when I was like 20 years old that you think Id be doing this, right? Or even 15, it was even more unlikely.
And I think the psychological sort of story is I was basically like a shut-in, like for the first 25 years of my life or so. Like I would have been the last person in the world when I was like 20 years old that you think Id be doing this, right? Or even 15, it was even more unlikely.
Rob:Well, you could start small, right? Thats kind of what I did. Again, not planned in advance, but writing an op-ed or writing some lower level essays and then those getting attention and people speaking about it and then people wanting to know the full, what is the Ken Burns documentary 300 page story versus the sort of the TikTok version of just 800 words or a thousand words. The people are curious about the details of someones life.
Well, you could start small, right? Thats kind of what I did. Again, not planned in advance, but writing an op-ed or writing some lower level essays and then those getting attention and people speaking about it and then people wanting to know the full, what is the Ken Burns documentary 300 page story versus the sort of the TikTok version of just 800 words or a thousand words. The people are curious about the details of someones life.
Richard:Yeah, part of it is I want to say I dont like talking about myself, but I actually do like talking about myself. [laughter] I talk about myself all the time. So I dont know if its it just feels different. Biographical feels more different than like, heres what I believe or heres what I did today.
Yeah, part of it is I want to say I dont like talking about myself, but I actually do like talking about myself. [laughter] I talk about myself all the time. So I dont know if its it just feels different. Biographical feels more different than like, heres what I believe or heres what I did today.
Rob:I hate it. I didnt like it either. I mean, I did have a point to make and I do hope that my book to some extent will force a conversation on whats been happening with families and stuff. But the personal, it was just like really unpleasant and weird but I am glad I did spend like time reading other memoirs and
I hate it. I didnt like it either. I mean, I did have a point to make and I do hope that my book to some extent will force a conversation on whats been happening with families and stuff. But the personal, it was just like really unpleasant and weird but I am glad I did spend like time reading other memoirs and
Richard:We should do a podcast on your book, but the thing about your book, if I wrote a memoir, the way I would have written it differently, you are nice to everyone. Obviously thats like, you want to be nice to people. You maintain their anonymity and all that. But I think my thoughts about people are maybe a little bit less charitable. Although you, obviously you show people behaving badly.
We should do a podcast on your book, but the thing about your book, if I wrote a memoir, the way I would have written it differently, you are nice to everyone. Obviously thats like, you want to be nice to people. You maintain their anonymity and all that. But I think my thoughts about people are maybe a little bit less charitable. Although you, obviously you show people behaving badly.
But I think I sort of, I dont know, I maybe have a little bit more of a cynical perspective. That was just sort of my feeling.
Rob:Okay, interesting. I didnt have an ax to grind with any particular person. I was glad to have other memoirs, I remember JD talking about how he also had basically the same response. Personal writing is kind of like oh god, and it feels a little self-indulgent. Like do people actually care about this stuff? People are just moved by personal stories. Right, like women especially. I have a lot of male readers, but I have a surprising number of female readers. And I think part of that is just that sort of biographical interest, women like personal details, like that kind of stuff. And so theyre connecting with it and so thats fine.
Okay, interesting. I didnt have an ax to grind with any particular person. I was glad to have other memoirs, I remember JD talking about how he also had basically the same response. Personal writing is kind of like oh god, and it feels a little self-indulgent. Like do people actually care about this stuff? People are just moved by personal stories. Right, like women especially. I have a lot of male readers, but I have a surprising number of female readers. And I think part of that is just that sort of biographical interest, women like personal details, like that kind of stuff. And so theyre connecting with it and so thats fine.
Richard:Yeah, but one thing we havent mentioned is like, if you want to meet chicks, you have a girlfriend and Im married, but like a little bit of fame goes a long way. [laughter]
Yeah, but one thing we havent mentioned is like, if you want to meet chicks, you have a girlfriend and Im married, but like a little bit of fame goes a long way. [laughter]
I mean, women will be very interested in you if you have a little bit of fame. And were not in like the most female-heavy fields or whatever, but even if youre a writer and youve got, you know, 20, 30,000 Twitter followers, people will actually treat you as important. So get fame. I will tell you, things become much easier for you.
Rob:I think it helps. Oh yeah, thats good advice for the average guy for sure. Just be a little bit notable and to build a bit of an audience where people just naturally take you more seriously. Thats true. Ive never really been famous and single at the same time. But generally people just treat you better anyway, at least.
I think it helps. Oh yeah, thats good advice for the average guy for sure. Just be a little bit notable and to build a bit of an audience where people just naturally take you more seriously. Thats true. Ive never really been famous and single at the same time. But generally people just treat you better anyway, at least.
Richard:But girls must creep up in your DM and want to see you and stuff, right?
But girls must creep up in your DM and want to see you and stuff, right?
Rob:Yeah, Ive had weird moments and stuff, but like, I never acted on any of it.
Yeah, Ive had weird moments and stuff, but like, I never acted on any of it.
And yeah, of course. And its Twitter, right? Twitter is very different. Like I have friends who are famous on Instagram and its just a completely different world where if youre famous on Instagram, you could just have a different girl every day come over if you want.
Whereas Twitter, you have like these kind of weird, I dont know thats probably not the nicest word.
Richard:But what are they famous for? Are they famous as male models? That must be why, right?
But what are they famous for? Are they famous as male models? That must be why, right?
Rob:Yeah. Male models or just very image driven, workout or like fitness influencer or whatever versus writer, it attracts a different kind of person and which is fine, whatever, but generally, yeah, its good advice.
Yeah. Male models or just very image driven, workout or like fitness influencer or whatever versus writer, it attracts a different kind of person and which is fine, whatever, but generally, yeah, its good advice.
Richard:Yeah, youre not going to have non-stop orgies necessarily, but if you want to find a smart girl and get married too
Yeah, youre not going to have non-stop orgies necessarily, but if you want to find a smart girl and get married too
Rob:If you want a girlfriend, right? If you want a smart girlfriend, and you have, when its 20 or 30,000 It wouldnt be that hard to do. Didnt Yarvin? Didnt he meet his wife that way or something? I remember he wrote a very short Substack post and was just like, Im back on the dating market and if you want to meet me whatever. I think he ended up dating someone or entering a relationship with someone that way
If you want a girlfriend, right? If you want a smart girlfriend, and you have, when its 20 or 30,000 It wouldnt be that hard to do. Didnt Yarvin? Didnt he meet his wife that way or something? I remember he wrote a very short Substack post and was just like, Im back on the dating market and if you want to meet me whatever. I think he ended up dating someone or entering a relationship with someone that way
Richard:Yeah, he did. I dont know how much is public and what happened with that, but yeah, he did actually meet someone. But it was pretty just direct, like Imtaking applicationsor whatever. Yeah, thatll work. I dont think hes, thats my words. I think thats not his [laughter]
Yeah, he did. I dont know how much is public and what happened with that, but yeah, he did actually meet someone. But it was pretty just direct, like Im
or whatever. Yeah, thatll work. I dont think hes, thats my words. I think thats not his [laughter]
Rob:Yeah. Taking applications. I love it. But I just remember the Substack post. And I think there was a follow-up where he wrote about all of this. At least what Im speaking about is just stuff that Ive read.
Yeah. Taking applications. I love it. But I just remember the Substack post. And I think there was a follow-up where he wrote about all of this. At least what Im speaking about is just stuff that Ive read.
But yeah, fame can definitely help in a way that is actually, and I think even girls sliding into your DMs, even that aside, I think it just does something for your confidence, right? Being good at something, because getting followership is basically just a proxy for competence and being good at something or being interesting. And so, whether its writing or speaking or sports or whatever it is, just having that level of mastery over something goes a long way. But yeah, having a large platform is huge.
Rob:And then, yeah, I think, do you have any favorites, when you write, do you, as you were sort of building your audience and stuff, did you ever have anything you looked at as far as sources to improve your writing or books that you reference to think about how to shape an essay or anything like that?
And then, yeah, I think, do you have any favorites, when you write, do you, as you were sort of building your audience and stuff, did you ever have anything you looked at as far as sources to improve your writing or books that you reference to think about how to shape an essay or anything like that?
Richard:So the only book Ive read on writing, and I read it not because I was looking to read a book on writing. I basically read every book Steven Pinker publishes. So Steven Pinker wrotea style book.And so just because it was Steven Pinker, thats the reason I read it. And actually I got, I didnt finish the last chapter, the last chapter is like half the book and I didnt finish the last chapter, but I went through most of it. So yeah, I would recommend that one. I just think Pinker is himself a brilliant writer and he actually mentions this in the book, that he himself used a lot of style guides. Hes like, when I talk to smart writers and ask them which books they looked at, the most common answer is none. And hes like, I was surprised by this. So I never had read a style book or anything until Pinker. But I recommend it. Its pretty good.
So the only book Ive read on writing, and I read it not because I was looking to read a book on writing. I basically read every book Steven Pinker publishes. So Steven Pinker wrote
And so just because it was Steven Pinker, thats the reason I read it. And actually I got, I didnt finish the last chapter, the last chapter is like half the book and I didnt finish the last chapter, but I went through most of it. So yeah, I would recommend that one. I just think Pinker is himself a brilliant writer and he actually mentions this in the book, that he himself used a lot of style guides. Hes like, when I talk to smart writers and ask them which books they looked at, the most common answer is none. And hes like, I was surprised by this. So I never had read a style book or anything until Pinker. But I recommend it. Its pretty good.
It did help me, even though I never had read a style book before. 90% of it is just reading a lot, just sort of seeing what works, I think one piece of advice that he gave in the book that stuck with me is, he says theres something called classical style and youre trying to talk to the reader in a way where youre not talking like youre on the street, shooting nonsense out of your mouth, youre also not talking for a super specialized audience.
You are saying, okay, I have a smart, well-meaning, honest sort of reader. Here are the steps that I take to get to my conclusion. And Im going to explain it to you and not use too fancy words or concepts that are unnecessary or whatever. I sort of did that to a certain extent always, but just seeing that as advice really stuck with you. Okay, this is classic style. But a lot of times I just sort of, I take after writers who I think do something really well. I love Scott Alexander.
I just hell just be like, okay, Im making this argument, heres something Im sure of, but this paper I just didnt understand so like maybe it has some relevance, I just didnt understand this, and then he would move on. And like, you cant do that in academia, right? [laughter] And thats the other thing, its like, oh, heres a citation I dont understand, but just ignore that for now, right? Or hell say, you know, my theory is, I have 30% confidence in this. Again, you dont do that, you just pretend like your theory is obviously correct and your opponents are wrong. And so, modeling after somebody like that.
Im like, oh, I love the things that guy does. Just taking lessons from that is natural to some extent. I mean, I just sort of write the way I think and what I pick up from reading other people.
Rob:Did you ever consciously copy other peoples voices? Not plagiarize, but copy their style, their voice? Before you found your own, did you start adopting other peoples voice first?
Did you ever consciously copy other peoples voices? Not plagiarize, but copy their style, their voice? Before you found your own, did you start adopting other peoples voice first?
Richard:Yeah, I think, again, Scott Alexander, I like his sense of humor. I like the way he leads you somewhere. I also like Steven Pinker. I think hes very, very good at getting at issues that are sort of important and he can think about them in a rigorous way, but also be entertaining and have good anecdotes. I think my most influential writers are probably those two.
Yeah, I think, again, Scott Alexander, I like his sense of humor. I like the way he leads you somewhere. I also like Steven Pinker. I think hes very, very good at getting at issues that are sort of important and he can think about them in a rigorous way, but also be entertaining and have good anecdotes. I think my most influential writers are probably those two.
Rob:I mean, those are both great. I think Ive skimmedSense of Styleand looked at bits and pieces, but I really liked Pinkers essay onwhy academic writing stinks.And one of the points he makes there and I see writers, especially two types of writers like novice online writers and academics, those are the two types of people who really fall into this the curse of knowledge trap that Pinker talks about.
I mean, those are both great. I think Ive skimmed
and looked at bits and pieces, but I really liked Pinkers essay on
And one of the points he makes there and I see writers, especially two types of writers like novice online writers and academics, those are the two types of people who really fall into this the curse of knowledge trap that Pinker talks about.
Richard:Yeah, thats another good concept, right?
Yeah, thats another good concept, right?
Rob:So you can kind of gesture at something and move right along. I think this is also something you get from teaching undergrads or just being a teacher in general. For people who are, I mentioned, academics, this experience of teaching people who actually know nothing about your field means you actually cant just make a couple of references and kind of gesture towards something and just assume they know what youre talking about and move right along. But actually sort of explicitly lay out step by step, assume that they kind of have an idea but just err on the side of over explaining something, even if you think, oh, maybe the audience will be insulted or whatever, chances are they wont be.
So you can kind of gesture at something and move right along. I think this is also something you get from teaching undergrads or just being a teacher in general. For people who are, I mentioned, academics, this experience of teaching people who actually know nothing about your field means you actually cant just make a couple of references and kind of gesture towards something and just assume they know what youre talking about and move right along. But actually sort of explicitly lay out step by step, assume that they kind of have an idea but just err on the side of over explaining something, even if you think, oh, maybe the audience will be insulted or whatever, chances are they wont be.
If they know what youre talking about, they just skip right past that because they already know and go to the next section. And so I think that is actually something that readers tell me that I love, that they like about my writing is I will actually just take the time to explain simple concepts or things that other people wouldnt necessarily know about. And its something I have to catch myself onto sometimes because I think its just a natural thing. If you know a lot of things that you use yourself as the anchor for what the world would know
Richard:Yeah, I think thats right, because sometimes that actually gives you more to write about if youre just writing simple things that are so simple to you, but actually are sort of profound and interesting. Another thing I realized, just writing and thinking, because Ive been paying attention to evolutionary psychology for like 15 years. And so there are some lessons, sometimes Ill see it in your stuff or whatever, that like are so banal to me at this point.
Yeah, I think thats right, because sometimes that actually gives you more to write about if youre just writing simple things that are so simple to you, but actually are sort of profound and interesting. Another thing I realized, just writing and thinking, because Ive been paying attention to evolutionary psychology for like 15 years. And so there are some lessons, sometimes Ill see it in your stuff or whatever, that like are so banal to me at this point.
Ill go back to it and be like, oh wait, I should explain this because theres always new people who are just having an intellectual awakening, or theres always new people who are just young and youre maybe their first exposure to something you might have read in Richard Dawkins or Steven Pinker, 10, 15 years ago. And youre right, they can bore an audience, but you always have the option of skipping. You dont have to read every word of every essay. And also its good to sometimes be reminded of stuff because, like I just said, you forget. You forget.
And going back and learning the things that you thought were profound at the time is also useful. And yeah, another thing is also, dont worry about, sometimes I feel like Im repeating myself sometimes. Every writer usually has six main things theyre saying over and over. [laughter] Like, whats my main thing? Political correctness is bad. Groups are different. You should be more confident. Conservatives are dumber than liberals. In your case, you have luxury beliefs. I had a tough life. We all have seven things.
But youre going to go over the same ground, but first of all, youre going to be, once again, reminding people, youre going to be reaching new people. But youre also, theres always a different angle. Every essay, every time it comes out of your mouth, every time it comes on the page, its a slightly different angle. Its going to be, youre at a different part of your life. Youre looking at it in a different way. So dont be repetitive. Dont be just, like theres some people who just talk about nothing but men being stronger than women or something like that. [laughter] Dont necessarily be that repetitive, but if you have like six, seven complex ideas, theres a lot you could do with those.
Rob:Do you ever worry about audience capture? About like, oh, you wrote a piece on Substack and it was a banger and people shared it and they loved it. And do you ever feel yourself sort of tilting more and more in that direction to give the people what they want?
Do you ever worry about audience capture? About like, oh, you wrote a piece on Substack and it was a banger and people shared it and they loved it. And do you ever feel yourself sort of tilting more and more in that direction to give the people what they want?
Richard:I worry about, I have the opposite worry. Im so hostile to audience capture that Im going to piss off everybody and nobodys going to ever want to listen to me again. So no, I really, I see it as a sort of a point of pride, like when I was in academia, its like these wokes, these freaks who announce their pronouns are going to tell me what I could say or think? And then with my audience, its like, what, these stupid low IQ conspiracy theorists, Im going to
I worry about, I have the opposite worry. Im so hostile to audience capture that Im going to piss off everybody and nobodys going to ever want to listen to me again. So no, I really, I see it as a sort of a point of pride, like when I was in academia, its like these wokes, these freaks who announce their pronouns are going to tell me what I could say or think? And then with my audience, its like, what, these stupid low IQ conspiracy theorists, Im going to
Rob:Is that how you see your audience? [laughter]
Is that how you see your audience? [laughter]
Richard:Some of, not all of you, the paid subscribers who are listening at this point, no, definitely not. You guys can afford to, you guys who can afford a subscription. But no, a lot of them actually are like that, and I cant allow myself to be captured by those people.
Some of, not all of you, the paid subscribers who are listening at this point, no, definitely not. You guys can afford to, you guys who can afford a subscription. But no, a lot of them actually are like that, and I cant allow myself to be captured by those people.
Rob:Yeah. We love the paid subscribers. Yeah. I dont really feel that either. I dont feel like kind of reactive either against it or towards it. I feel very fortunate actually that whatever Im interested in, the audience tends to have some interest in too. Maybe not as much interested as I would like. There are essays that I wish would be more popular and then there are pieces like, you know, you can play the hits, right? Like whenever I beat up on elite universities, I know thats going to be a banger. If I put the paywall thing, I know Im going to get new subscribers, I just know thats going to work. But I dont want to just like make that my hobby horse, look at this retarded thing that Yales doing again or whatever.
Yeah. We love the paid subscribers. Yeah. I dont really feel that either. I dont feel like kind of reactive either against it or towards it. I feel very fortunate actually that whatever Im interested in, the audience tends to have some interest in too. Maybe not as much interested as I would like. There are essays that I wish would be more popular and then there are pieces like, you know, you can play the hits, right? Like whenever I beat up on elite universities, I know thats going to be a banger. If I put the paywall thing, I know Im going to get new subscribers, I just know thats going to work. But I dont want to just like make that my hobby horse, look at this retarded thing that Yales doing again or whatever.
But then yeah, there are other people, but generally I write what I enjoy and I write things that interest me, and I pay almost no attention to how the audience might react. And yeah, I feel like a little bit ambivalent about what advice to give young writers because you do want to build an audience and to some extent you are subjugated to their whims because if you want them to stay and to read and to click and everything, you got to give them a little bit of what they want at least initially. So yeah, what would you tell young writers as far as the audience capture game? Would you say just stick to what you enjoy or do you think you should pay attention to how the audience reacts?
Richard:I mean, I think thats something you worry about later. I mean, because you build an audience before you could be captured by an audience. Yeah, and I think there are real trade-offs. One thing that pisses me off, it pisses me off because like, sometimes people are pissed off about things that are true, but to me its because its so untrue. Its like, youre just saying this left-wing thing like pro-vaccine because you want credibility with liberals or something.
I mean, I think thats something you worry about later. I mean, because you build an audience before you could be captured by an audience. Yeah, and I think there are real trade-offs. One thing that pisses me off, it pisses me off because like, sometimes people are pissed off about things that are true, but to me its because its so untrue. Its like, youre just saying this left-wing thing like pro-vaccine because you want credibility with liberals or something.
And its like, you idiots, you dont understand how this works. Theres a right-wing audience and a left-wing audience. Very few people actually like you taking the youre actually just pissing off your audience. And I have a primarily right-wing audience. And so like to be conscious, actually the path of least resistance is just buying into it. Some people can make the sort of heterodox, Im taking different things from different perspectives and you know synthesizing it or having my own view of things, some people can do that.
Its not like if you have a right-wing audience you pretend to be right wing on every issue. You just dont talk about the things that are going to anger your audience, right? Thats what 90% of the people do but then youre missing out on a lot of things where you have potentially something interesting to say, right? And so yeah, just be aware that theyre trained. I mean if its like if youre on the border and you cant have an audience if you alienate 40% of them, then Im not going to say you have to be honest on every single issue. These are just trade-offs that people have to make.
Rob:Have you ever written something that actually did cost you like a huge chunk of your audience? I mean, because you will write things that are at odds with the sort of standard party line and among conservatives, like vaccine stuff
Have you ever written something that actually did cost you like a huge chunk of your audience? I mean, because you will write things that are at odds with the sort of standard party line and among conservatives, like vaccine stuff
Richard:Yeah, the vaccine thing, the fact that these people hate the vaccine. It gave them all horns and made them all infertile and theyre just out of their minds. You get a lot, youd lose a lot of followers. So its hard to tell because a lot of these essays often go viral. Sometimes theyll go viral among leftists like themedia is honest and good, a lot of people read that and that got a lot of attention.
Yeah, the vaccine thing, the fact that these people hate the vaccine. It gave them all horns and made them all infertile and theyre just out of their minds. You get a lot, youd lose a lot of followers. So its hard to tell because a lot of these essays often go viral. Sometimes theyll go viral among leftists like the
, a lot of people read that and that got a lot of attention.
So I mean, have I ever noticed like a mass unsubscription event? I dont think so. Ive noticed losing a few Twitter followers. I think at this point, people who are still with me, they are not going to be easily alienated. Youve stuck around this long. Like the next thing is probably not going to piss you off. So not really anymore, but you know, part of the thing is I waited a while, like I said, I was in academia.
I was not being so politically correct on Twitter, but for a while I was sort of holding my fire a little bit on anti-right-wing stuff. Like I wasnt like talking about abortion, it became more of an issue. Like I wasnt talking about that at all for a while. But yeah, you might have to do this in steps. You might have to build an audience first before you can afford to lose anybody.
Rob:Yeah, thats interesting. Yeah, well, you dont necessarily go out of your way to piss them off, but you sort of tiptoe around certain subjects or, yeah, I mean, I think at this point, most people in general probably dont have that many views that would upset their own readers anyway, because people who are conservative tend to kind of be conservative across the board, especially the more highly educated people who would tend to be writers, right? This is a pretty well robust finding in political science, right? That the more educated you are, the more consistent your views are and the more they kind of hang together with one party or the other.
Yeah, thats interesting. Yeah, well, you dont necessarily go out of your way to piss them off, but you sort of tiptoe around certain subjects or, yeah, I mean, I think at this point, most people in general probably dont have that many views that would upset their own readers anyway, because people who are conservative tend to kind of be conservative across the board, especially the more highly educated people who would tend to be writers, right? This is a pretty well robust finding in political science, right? That the more educated you are, the more consistent your views are and the more they kind of hang together with one party or the other.
Richard:Yeah, but thats just because people are tribal thinkers. I dont think its like, okay, some things fit together, being pro-market in one circumstance versus another, like okay, but like the idea that abortion and foreign policy and gun control and economics, you could see across the world, sometimes socially liberal and like the libertarian is one wing and the socially conservative and the socialists are on the other wing. So yeah, I think thats right, but I think people are just sort of sheep. I mean, I think thats why theyre just like, whatever, I just accept the right-wing package based on what my tribe is.
Yeah, but thats just because people are tribal thinkers. I dont think its like, okay, some things fit together, being pro-market in one circumstance versus another, like okay, but like the idea that abortion and foreign policy and gun control and economics, you could see across the world, sometimes socially liberal and like the libertarian is one wing and the socially conservative and the socialists are on the other wing. So yeah, I think thats right, but I think people are just sort of sheep. I mean, I think thats why theyre just like, whatever, I just accept the right-wing package based on what my tribe is.
Rob:Yeah, I think thats fair. I mean, so maybe at least for writers, right? Its better to be captured by your audience as a writer versus captured by your audience as, you know, some YouTube influencer or TikTok influencer. I just cant imagine wearing clothes and presenting your image in a certain way on screen because you know, like that to me just feels so tawdry and so I dont know, just something strange about that.
Yeah, I think thats fair. I mean, so maybe at least for writers, right? Its better to be captured by your audience as a writer versus captured by your audience as, you know, some YouTube influencer or TikTok influencer. I just cant imagine wearing clothes and presenting your image in a certain way on screen because you know, like that to me just feels so tawdry and so I dont know, just something strange about that.
Whereas youre still writing, theres still something, you still have to put some effort and some mental energy into it. Yeah, so I think in that in that case, its almost harder to be captured by your audience in some way too, because its one thing to just put on a shirt and speak in a certain way and use certain phrases, but then actually writing, you do have to either start to believe in the bullshit yourself that youre selling, you know, that youre youve been captured with, or you basically just have to be a more careful thinker in some ways as a writer versus other domains.
Richard:Yeah, so before we close this out Rob. If people want to know more, I think a lot of people are going to be interested in this, have good reactions to this conversation. Are you still doing the meetings, right? People can still book a meeting on your website or no?
Yeah, so before we close this out Rob. If people want to know more, I think a lot of people are going to be interested in this, have good reactions to this conversation. Are you still doing the meetings, right? People can still book a meeting on your website or no?
Rob:Oh, Substack meetings. I havent opened them up in a while, but eventually, yeah, at some point I will reopen.
Oh, Substack meetings. I havent opened them up in a while, but eventually, yeah, at some point I will reopen.
Richard:Okay, well, I have meetings, so if people want more, there is an opportunity there. Actually, I enjoy talking to people, you can talk about that sometime. But yeah, this was a great conversation. Anything else, Rob? Any words of advice to aspiring intellectuals out there?
Okay, well, I have meetings, so if people want more, there is an opportunity there. Actually, I enjoy talking to people, you can talk about that sometime. But yeah, this was a great conversation. Anything else, Rob? Any words of advice to aspiring intellectuals out there?
Rob:No, I think we covered quite a bit here. But yeah, I mean, I think for me, at least the main thing would be the consistency. Just stick with it. Its just hard. Its hard to build an audience as a writer. Youre not only competing against other writing, but youre competing with TikTok and YouTube and every little thing thats out there.
No, I think we covered quite a bit here. But yeah, I mean, I think for me, at least the main thing would be the consistency. Just stick with it. Its just hard. Its hard to build an audience as a writer. Youre not only competing against other writing, but youre competing with TikTok and YouTube and every little thing thats out there.
Richard:And TV, and life. [laughter]
And TV, and life. [laughter]
Rob:Yeah, theres so many other things, the fact that anyone even reads long form content on the Internet is almost a miracle in some ways, just because theres so many interesting things out there.
Yeah, theres so many other things, the fact that anyone even reads long form content on the Internet is almost a miracle in some ways, just because theres so many interesting things out there.
But yeah, youve just got to stick with it and keep going. And you know, if the writings interesting and if you share it, oh yeah, thats the other thing. Dont be shy. Writers are weirdly shy about sharing. So dont be afraid to post it on Twitter. Dont be annoying about it, but dont be afraid to self-promote. I mean, thats just the world we live in now.
Richard:Yeah, exactly. I second that. Yeah, if youre shy, this might not be the career for you. [laughter] Just overcome that in general, like not just about your writing, about every aspect of what youre doing. All right, cool. Until next time, Rob.
Yeah, exactly. I second that. Yeah, if youre shy, this might not be the career for you. [laughter] Just overcome that in general, like not just about your writing, about every aspect of what youre doing. All right, cool. Until next time, Rob.
Rob:All right, take care, Richard.
All right, take care, Richard.
Comments
Restacks
Tom Grey
Tom Grey
Toms FI News
Toms FI News
Toms FI News
Jun 3
Rob, great transcript, does substack make it?  That would be a good addition to all podcasts. I always prefer reading.
Rob, great transcript, does substack make it?  That would be a good addition to all podcasts. I always prefer reading.
I read long form posts on the internet INSTEAD of reading booksmost books make only a few points that could be effectively condensed into a magazine article (6, 7? Often repeated). So reading a good book review that says what those points are is most of the value, 70-80%, at only 10-5-1% of the time cost.
I read long form posts on the internet INSTEAD of reading booksmost books make only a few points that could be effectively condensed into a magazine article (6, 7? Often repeated). So reading a good book review that says what those points are is most of the value, 70-80%, at only 10-5-1% of the time cost.
Im not a writer because I know the time cost of writing like going to the gym, so the Rob note of doing the steady work is important to avoid self delusion and disappointment. Yet the Richard romantic view of writing to change the world is more my own motivation, as in my proposal for Israel to create a 5 canton Gaza Confederation.
Im not a writer because I know the time cost of writing like going to the gym, so the Rob note of doing the steady work is important to avoid self delusion and disappointment. Yet the Richard romantic view of writing to change the world is more my own motivation, as in my proposal for Israel to create a 5 canton Gaza Confederation.
Freddie recently wrote about how he writes (prone! Unbelievable), and even more often than either of you two, both as a (stupid) Marxist romantic, but also enjoying a daily grind. Hes making maybe twice or more than the median avg -$62k/yr. When he says that writing is all hes good at, it means any other job he would do is merely avg or less, like teaching. Its good for him to grateful at bea successful writer, with some talent and skill and lots of writing effort, much of which he loves.
Freddie recently wrote about how he writes (prone! Unbelievable), and even more often than either of you two, both as a (stupid) Marxist romantic, but also enjoying a daily grind. Hes making maybe twice or more than the median avg -$62k/yr. When he says that writing is all hes good at, it means any other job he would do is merely avg or less, like teaching. Its good for him to grateful at bea successful writer, with some talent and skill and lots of writing effort, much of which he loves.
Reminds me of Michael Jordan, who likely expressed gratitude at being a pro B-ball player, as many pros do, along with singers, actors, dancers, musiciansall fame creating hobby/entertainment professions.  If you get famous by your job, its likely the only work youre able to do that pays the bills AND gives you some chick magnet fame.
Reminds me of Michael Jordan, who likely expressed gratitude at being a pro B-ball player, as many pros do, along with singers, actors, dancers, musiciansall fame creating hobby/entertainment professions.  If you get famous by your job, its likely the only work youre able to do that pays the bills AND gives you some chick magnet fame.
Infotainment. Thats what youre creating with good writing, info+entertainment. With the option for many readers to make it interactive by leaving comments. As I do in a way of recording my notes, actively reading the infotainment which gets my limited attention.
Infotainment. Thats what youre creating with good writing, info+entertainment. With the option for many readers to make it interactive by leaving comments. As I do in a way of recording my notes, actively reading the infotainment which gets my limited attention.
Richard should certainly do a memoir now, before all the new life hes living overlays his early memories. Troubled was a great read, and a shorter version would have missed even more details. Theres probably even a small market for the more complete set of memories you have about your life and its various small crises, including first kiss, first sex, more of the illegal actions & pranks, shoplifting stuff, fun stuff done with & without problems.
Richard should certainly do a memoir now, before all the new life hes living overlays his early memories. Troubled was a great read, and a shorter version would have missed even more details. Theres probably even a small market for the more complete set of memories you have about your life and its various small crises, including first kiss, first sex, more of the illegal actions & pranks, shoplifting stuff, fun stuff done with & without problems.
Like
Reply
Share
DWAnderson
DWAnderson
DWAnderson
DWAnderson
DWAnderson
May 24
It was interesting to see that the "Women Like Fame" section was unironically so close to the "Avoiding Audience Capture" section!
It was interesting to see that the "Women Like Fame" section was unironically so close to the "Avoiding Audience Capture" section!
Reading the first section more broadly as "Fame is Good" highlights the more universal tension between these two concepts. This is a variant of the same tension between the desire for effective politicians who get things done and those who stay true to their principles. Inevitably getting things done requires building relationships with other people who justifiably demand some measure of loyalty to them and their group (party caucus, etc.). The meaning of that loyalty is that you sacrifice your principles some or even many times in deference to that loyalty. I don't think there is any way around this dilemma unless you are the rare person whose principles are identical to those of the group you are loyal to.
Reading the first section more broadly as "Fame is Good" highlights the more universal tension between these two concepts. This is a variant of the same tension between the desire for effective politicians who get things done and those who stay true to their principles. Inevitably getting things done requires building relationships with other people who justifiably demand some measure of loyalty to them and their group (party caucus, etc.). The meaning of that loyalty is that you sacrifice your principles some or even many times in deference to that loyalty. I don't think there is any way around this dilemma unless you are the rare person whose principles are identical to those of the group you are loyal to.
Like
Reply
Share
Top
Latest
Discussions

Rob Henderson

Rob Henderson

Rob Henderson

Rob Henderson

Rob Henderson

Rob Henderson

Rob Henderson

Rob Henderson

Rob Henderson

Rob Henderson


undefined subscriptions will be displayed on your profile (edit)
Skip for now
For your security, we need to re-authenticate you.
Click the link we sent to sasha.p.podolsky@gmail.com, orclick here to sign in.