

1
Book meeting
Book a meeting
Subscribed
Share
Share
Give a gift subscription
Give a gift subscription
Youve struggled with the fear of walking into a room full of complete strangers and having nothing to say.
We all have.
A couple of weeks ago I visited a matchmaking mixer hosted by Louise Perry, author ofThe Case Against the Sexual Revolutionand Evan Riggs, co-host of the Deprogrammed Podcast. Just visiting as a friend, I couldnt help but put on my amateur anthropology hat as I walked around clocking how conversations were going. The turnout was excellent, people had a good time, and I saw several attendees exchanging numbers and contact information. One thing I noticed, though, is that young people have become a little unpracticed at having good conversations.Maybe due to social media/technology, or a lingering effect of the lockdown and lack of socializing, or something else.
A couple of weeks ago I visited a matchmaking mixer hosted by Louise Perry, author of
and Evan Riggs, co-host of the Deprogrammed Podcast. Just visiting as a friend, I couldnt help but put on my amateur anthropology hat as I walked around clocking how conversations were going. The turnout was excellent, people had a good time, and I saw several attendees exchanging numbers and contact information. One thing I noticed, though, is that young people have become a little unpracticed at having good conversations.Maybe due to social media/technology, or a lingering effect of the lockdown and lack of socializing, or something else.
So I decided to write this post to share what I know about how to have good conversations.
This isnt just for meeting romantic partners. The information in this post will help you with conversations in general.
The first thing to know is that most conversations are not about exchanging information. For the most part, especially early on in conversations as youre getting to know someone, conversation consists of small talk and idle chatter, which functions to implicitly evaluate others kindness and trustworthiness as potential social allies.
This idea was developed by the evolutionary psychologist Robin Dunbar, who observed that for apes, grooming is not primarily about hygiene but rather about forming relationships, cementing bonds, and influencing their fellow primates.
Dunbar advanced the view that for humans, small talk and idle chatter are the equivalent of grooming behaviors. That is, much of conversation is not entirely about exchanging concrete information (though it is often about that); it is also about building and maintaining social ties.
Some humans have managed to think their way out of important and crucial behaviors. For many smart young guys, they think small talk is a waste of time. I used to think that way myself. All the how are yous and chit-chat about weather and sports. It just seemed mindless and dull.
Id long known that I felt emotionally and materially deprived as a kid. But only recently did I realize howintellectuallydeprived I felt. No one around me wanted to talk about interesting ideas or abstract concepts or hypothetical scenarios. I was around guys who were average to slightly below average in their curiosity and latent cognitive ability. The girls I dated at the time were like this too. Things improved when I got to the Air Force, where there were people who had wide-ranging interests. I felt an immense sense of gratitude and relief.Someone else out there thinks about these things too. Id gotten pretty good at idle chatter and small talk, though.
Id long known that I felt emotionally and materially deprived as a kid. But only recently did I realize how
deprived I felt. No one around me wanted to talk about interesting ideas or abstract concepts or hypothetical scenarios. I was around guys who were average to slightly below average in their curiosity and latent cognitive ability. The girls I dated at the time were like this too. Things improved when I got to the Air Force, where there were people who had wide-ranging interests. I felt an immense sense of gratitude and relief.
. Id gotten pretty good at idle chatter and small talk, though.
The reality is that most conversation is not deep or thoughtful or complex. If you want to connect with people, smart people included, it helps to grasp the basics of commonplace conversation.
A chimpanzee who thought to itself, Why am I grooming this other ape who obviously doesnt have any insects? What a waste of time would cultivate fewer allies, have less access to resources (no one would share with him), and obtain fewer mates.
Small talkthe kind that happens between two people who dont know each otheris some of the most important talk we do.
The Stanford Graduate School of Business professor Thomas Harrell investigated what predicted success for the schools alumni. He and his team found that GPA did not predict future success. The trait that the schools most accomplished graduates had in common was verbal fluency. Those who had started businesses and climbed the corporate ladder were those who could confidently make conversation with anyone in any situation.
Across contextssocial, professional, romanticyou can aim for the same objective: start a conversation, keep it going, establish a bond, and leave the other person thinking, I like that person.
It is easier to accomplish this objective than you think.
Research has indicated that following social interactions, people systematically underestimated how much their conversation partners liked them and enjoyed their company. The researchersconcluded, Conversation appears to be a domain in which people display uncharacteristic pessimism about their performance.
Research has indicated that following social interactions, people systematically underestimated how much their conversation partners liked them and enjoyed their company. The researchers
, Conversation appears to be a domain in which people display uncharacteristic pessimism about their performance.
This liking gap holds a lot of people back. Making an effort at getting better at conversation can help you close it.
In her bookTalk: The Science of Conversation, the social psychologist Elizabeth Stokoe uncovers research from conversation analysis and provides many useful tips on communication.
In her book
, the social psychologist Elizabeth Stokoe uncovers research from conversation analysis and provides many useful tips on communication.
A point from the book:
Good conversation is made up of questions; if you havent asked one within two minutes of speaking, stop yourself and get a grip.
Good conversation is made up of questions; if you havent asked one within two minutes of speaking, stop yourself and get a grip.
This is true, and many people intuitively understand it. The best conversationalists Ive ever met are excellent at asking questions. Even stupid or nave questions. Talented conversationalists will ask silly questions just to have something to talk about.
But if you take this too far, though, you risk turning a conversation into an interview.
Ive spoken with several people who have attended speed dating events. They tell me that these events sound fun, but they are in fact often boring. The reason: they turn into interviews. You spend a minute or two with a bunch of different people. You ask them (and they ask you) the same questions. Where are you from, what do you do, how long have you lived here, and so on. Naturally, attendees just default to matching with people they find physically attractive. Often, though, people leave these events early because they are so dull.
Good conversations are not interviews. You have to strike a balance between talking a little about yourself and your thoughts and your interests, while also volleying back to the other person and carefully listening to them.
Asking questions is good.
But so is speaking in a way that elicits interest from the other person.
Put differently, you should make it easy for them to ask you questions.
You can do this with conversational lures. Some examples, along with the question you might want to elicit:
Where I was living before
(Where were you living before?)
You could also say Where I come from and for 95% of people it would be just fine to ask, Where are you from? But ideologues have brainwormed their way into some people, who are now worried that asking this question will make them a racist or something.
When I lived in France
(Where in France?/Why were you living there?)
When I go on my morning rides
(What kind of rides?)
In this book Im reading
(What book?)
After practice, I usually
(Practice for what?)
At my last job
When I travel later this year
In my sport
In one of my lessons the other day
When Im getting ready for a performance I like to
When I practice with my instrument
The other day, one of my students asked
The whole point here is to tee up your conversational partner. Its best not to do this a lot (it can get a little obnoxious if done too much). Still, its better to do it too much than too little. Keeping a conversation going early on is typically better than having awkward silences. This is especially true in the first 2-3 hours of cumulative conversation time. After 2-3 hours of total communication, the occasional lengthy pause is fine.
Dont give away everything about yourself up frontinstead of saying, I used to teach English in Japan, and one time one of my students You could say I used to teach in another country, and one time one of my students
This makes it easy for your conversation partner to ask, Where were you living? or What were you teaching?
Less history, more mystery.
Studies have found that curiosityfollowsan inverted U-shaped curve.
Studies have found that curiosity
an inverted U-shaped curve.
Curiosity is at its lowest when people haveno ideaabout the answer to a question.
Curiosity is at its lowest when people have
about the answer to a question.
Curiosity is also at its lowest when people areentirely certainthey have the answer.
Curiosity is also at its lowest when people are
they have the answer.
People are most interested in gathering information about something if they knowjustenough about it to find it interesting. But not so much that it becomes boring.
People are most interested in gathering information about something if they know
enough about it to find it interesting. But not so much that it becomes boring.
The place of maximum curiositythe zone where you want to beis when people think they have some idea but aren't sure.
There is a sweet spot, where people know a little something, but want to fill in the gaps of their knowledge. This is where curiosity is at its highest.
With new conversation partners, you want to drop some hints about yourself. But dont tell the full story from start to finish. Make it easy for them to be curious about you and ask questions.
Youll notice that having an interesting and varied life makes it easier to develop good conversational lures. The more interesting your life, the easier it is to advertise parts of yourself that others would want to know more about.
If you are a very dull person who has never done anything interesting, you wont have many ways to elicit interest.
Fortunately, just about everyone has a least a couple of interesting or semi-interesting things about themselves they can talk about. Cooking, traveling, sports, books youre reading, languages youre learning, essays youre writing, side projects youre developing, cars youre repairing, musical instruments youre learning, and so on. If you spend the majority of your life scrolling social media, you will be a boring person. So dont do that.
You also want to make it easy for the other person to sound interesting and sound knowledgeable. Use conversational lures to make it easy for the other person to ask questions about yourself, but dont dominate the conversation. Speak for a minute or two or three and then find a way to get the other person to speak too. Ask questions.
The point of small talk and idle chatter is to get the other person to feel good. Ask questions until youve found something you have in common and then dive into that topic. Once the conversation fizzles, its okay to meander and ask other questions or drop other conversational lures.
When getting to know someone, its best to avoid sad stories and avoid telling lots of jokes. If youre naturally funny (i.e., more than 4 people in your life have independently told you that you are a funny person), then go ahead and express that part of yourself. But otherwise, dont go out of your way to try to be funny. Humor differs between people. And often people wont get your jokes until they have some context on who you are as a person.
Becoming a good conversationalist takes reps.
You cant just show up one day at a matchmaking event or a singles mixer or a speed dating event and expect to be a dazzling conversationalist.
You have to work at it. That means regular social interaction. With friends, acquaintances, coworkers, teammates, and so on.
Dont use the self-checkout line at the store. Go and speak the human being working the register and exchange a few words with them. This is the social equivalent of taking the stairs instead of the elevator. It's good for you.
Dont be afraid to engage in a bit of small talk with baristas and restaurant servers and gym staff. This doesnt mean to talk their ears off and hold up the line. It just means saying Hey hows it going and if they seem friendly (and theres no line behind you) you can follow up by asking Have you tried this [coffee/snack/spice/dish/etc] before?
If your Uber driver asks you how your day is going, dont shut him down with a Good, and pop your air pods in. You can actually tell him a little bit about what youre up to that day or ask him if hes had a busy day himself.
If your barber is talking to you, go ahead and engage. In the moment, you might find it uncomfortable or awkward, especially if you arent used to speaking with strangers. But youll feel better afterwards.
There is empiricalevidencethat people feel more authentic when they behave in an extraverted manner, even when they themselves identify as introverts. As Ive writtenbefore, people seem to feel most authentic when they behave in a way that other people find appealing.
There is empirical
that people feel more authentic when they behave in an extraverted manner, even when they themselves identify as introverts. As Ive written
, people seem to feel most authentic when they behave in a way that other people find appealing.
Moreover, there is a growing body of research indicating that people feel better after engaging in small talk with strangers. Interestingly, people underestimate how good this will make them feel. Most people predict they will feel either neutral or even worse after small talk with a stranger, but in fact they usually report feeling better.
One studyfoundthat people on a public bus had a more positive experience when they spoke with a stranger than when they sat in isolation. Yet people predicted beforehand that they would feel the precise opposite. People ignore strangers because they mistakenly think that forming a connection would be unpleasant.
One study
that people on a public bus had a more positive experience when they spoke with a stranger than when they sat in isolation. Yet people predicted beforehand that they would feel the precise opposite. People ignore strangers because they mistakenly think that forming a connection would be unpleasant.
More recently, a field experiment with London-area train commuters showed that study participants assigned to talk with a strangerreportedhaving a significantly more positive experience than those who sat in solitude or spoke with no one.
More recently, a field experiment with London-area train commuters showed that study participants assigned to talk with a stranger
having a significantly more positive experience than those who sat in solitude or spoke with no one.
Even something as simple as saying Have a nice day or Take care to a strangerpredictsgreater subsequent positive emotion.
Even something as simple as saying Have a nice day or Take care to a stranger
greater subsequent positive emotion.
Ill speak with taxi and uber drivers. Some questions Ill ask: How many passengers they have on a typical day, their record for most number of jobs in a day, and the farthest theyve ever driven for a job.
Conversations are like any other skill. You gotta practice.
Its akin to physical fitness. The more you work at it, the better you become.
Just about everyone, regardless of personality, temperament, cognitive ability, and so on, can improve their conversational skills.
If you have some work to do on your laptop, dont just coup yourself in your apartment all day. Go out to a caf and spend some time around people.
As George MacGill has said, When presented with two options, choose the one that brings about the greater amount of luck.
If two gyms are equidistant from your house and youre single, perhaps it would be wiser to join the gym that is next to a coffee shop or a grocery store. If youre a student, it might be wiser to do your homework in the school library or a Starbucks rather than your dorm room.
Small talk and idle chatter isnt just for getting to know someone, though. It can also be important for maintaining a relationship. As I discussed inthis post, feelings of intimacy often level off in a relationship. You have to work to keep it going. A lot of males think communication is just for conveying information. But conversing, even if about nothing important, helps to sustain the relationship and soothes your romantic partner. Years ago in college I dated a girl who sometimes liked to speak on the phone in the evenings. Shed say, Tell me about your day, and then tee me up by saying So you woke up, and she wanted me to describe my day in some detail. At age 19, I would have thought this was sillyI went to class, did some homework, tutored some kids, what is the point of describing this two or three times a week. At age 27, though, I had some understanding that this was important for her, and that she enjoyed speaking with me even if it was about nothing at all important. So I would go through and explain how I woke up, squeezed some toothpaste onto my Oral-B (as a rule, specificity is  funnier than generic terms), flipped the switch on my Mr. Coffee machine and so on. And then asked her the same question. A bit of roaming chit-chat, light banter, casual conversation with no clear destination in mind. Most people used to enjoy this. People, especially young people, used to spend hours talking on the phone with friends and romantic interests. Some still do, but its far less common now than before the smartphone era. The decline in phone conversation is probably another reason why nowadays more young people aresingleandfriendless. Its hard to build and sustain any kind of social relationship through screens alone.
Small talk and idle chatter isnt just for getting to know someone, though. It can also be important for maintaining a relationship. As I discussed in
, feelings of intimacy often level off in a relationship. You have to work to keep it going. A lot of males think communication is just for conveying information. But conversing, even if about nothing important, helps to sustain the relationship and soothes your romantic partner. Years ago in college I dated a girl who sometimes liked to speak on the phone in the evenings. Shed say, Tell me about your day, and then tee me up by saying So you woke up, and she wanted me to describe my day in some detail. At age 19, I would have thought this was sillyI went to class, did some homework, tutored some kids, what is the point of describing this two or three times a week. At age 27, though, I had some understanding that this was important for her, and that she enjoyed speaking with me even if it was about nothing at all important. So I would go through and explain how I woke up, squeezed some toothpaste onto my Oral-B (as a rule, specificity is  funnier than generic terms), flipped the switch on my Mr. Coffee machine and so on. And then asked her the same question. A bit of roaming chit-chat, light banter, casual conversation with no clear destination in mind. Most people used to enjoy this. People, especially young people, used to spend hours talking on the phone with friends and romantic interests. Some still do, but its far less common now than before the smartphone era. The decline in phone conversation is probably another reason why nowadays more young people are
and
. Its hard to build and sustain any kind of social relationship through screens alone.
Some other tips.
Always (always) remember the other persons name. Ask them to repeat it as soon as theyve said it, and then say it back to them. Do this once more if you have to. Then use it again when you say goodbye to them. Im bad with names, and keep a list of names on my notetaking app on my phone to help me jog my memory.
A recent studyfoundthat people rated their conversation partners more highly when they smiled, nodded a lot, and spoke with greater intensity. This doesnt mean you should speak like a theater actor. But try not be monotoned and lifeless.
A recent study
that people rated their conversation partners more highly when they smiled, nodded a lot, and spoke with greater intensity. This doesnt mean you should speak like a theater actor. But try not be monotoned and lifeless.
Get out of your head and focus on putting the other person at ease. If youre really shy, one thing you can do is adopt the demeanor or persona of a socially confident role model you admire. This extraverted role model could be a friend, a coach, a writer, an influencer, a podcaster, a teacher, etc. If you are shy (which often comes from an internal feeling that youre not worthy to be in the conversation), act like someone else. Your bad impression of that person is better than being a wallflower and refraining from social contact. This doesnt mean to be fake. Dont tell lies about yourself or anything like that. Share your own thoughts and your own views. But keep in mind how this person behaves in social settings and try to inch more closely to that aura of confidence.
There was a movie (I think starring Sean Connery) where a character says, I think about what a smart person would do, and I do that. Which doesnt really make sense. But it kind of makes sense. This approach might not work to boost intelligence, but it will work to boost confidence, or at least the appearance of it. In a social situation where you are feeling nervous or shy, ask what your extraverted role model would do, and do that.
Get good at the airport question. You probably already know what it is: If I were trapped in an airport for a few hours, would I want to spend it with this person?
Be interesting. Mention your large collection of punk rock memorabilia, your amateur photography hobby, or your contrarian views about the benefits of caffeine. Squeeze in some time to keep a cursory awareness of current events (Iavoid seekingout the news but will read articles people send me under the assumption that if someone bothered to send it, its something people are talking about). Remember interesting stories and tidbits so you can pass them to people you meet.
Be interesting. Mention your large collection of punk rock memorabilia, your amateur photography hobby, or your contrarian views about the benefits of caffeine. Squeeze in some time to keep a cursory awareness of current events (I
out the news but will read articles people send me under the assumption that if someone bothered to send it, its something people are talking about). Remember interesting stories and tidbits so you can pass them to people you meet.
At one of my meetups, a young woman explained to me that she was at a job interview earlier that day.
The interviewer asked her, What news outlets do you read?
She replied, To be honest, I dont read much news lately. But I have been reading a bunch of newsletters and Substacks.
Her interviewer replied, Amazing! I love Substack. What are some of your favorites?
Ive been reading a lot of Rob Hendersons newsletter.
Ah, the luxury beliefs guy.
So I told her that was a cool story. Then about 10 minutes later a few more people join the meetup. The young woman leans over to me and says, Okay so this is awkward. That guy over there who just arrived was the one who interviewed me.
Two points to this story. The first is that you should read my newsletter; maybe itll help you get a job.
Second, you might be able to get away with avoiding the news if you read a lot of interesting Substacks. Sadly, reading popular (rather than less popular) Substacks is probably better for socializing, because the odds will be higher that your potential conversation partners also read them. This logic also holds for podcasts.
However, if you enjoy obscure newsletters and podcasts and find someone else who also enjoys them, your bond will more quickly be established. As one group of researchersput it, sharing a rare preference with someone is often more exciting and meaningful than sharing a common preference. If you like Taylor Swift and meet someone else who likes her, that shared interest might be interesting but not exactly exhilarating. But if you like some obscure garage band and meet someone else who likes them, that can be a truly exciting moment. The same likely goes for content more generally.
However, if you enjoy obscure newsletters and podcasts and find someone else who also enjoys them, your bond will more quickly be established. As one group of researchers
, sharing a rare preference with someone is often more exciting and meaningful than sharing a common preference. If you like Taylor Swift and meet someone else who likes her, that shared interest might be interesting but not exactly exhilarating. But if you like some obscure garage band and meet someone else who likes them, that can be a truly exciting moment. The same likely goes for content more generally.
So those are my tips for how to be a better conversationalist.
To briefly summarize:
Most getting-to-know-you conversations are about social harmony, good vibes, and unconscious evaluation of whether a person is kind and trustworthy.
Ask questions, and to make it easy for your conversation partner to ask you questions. The more interesting your life, the simpler it is for others to ask you questions.
If you cant get out of your own head, try to impersonate an extraverted person you admire. Your bad impression of them is better than being a wallflower or a loner.
Practice. To get good at conversation with a specific person, you have to get good at small talk in general. Speak more with people around you.
To receive new posts, access thefull archives, and support my work, consider becoming a free or premium subscriber.
Subscribed
Comments
Restacks
John Raisor
John Raisor
Occams Raisor's Uncomfortable T
Occams Raisor's Uncomfortable T
Occams Raisor's Uncomfortable T
Jul 25, 2023
I have noticed that service workers in their 20s have had their conversation skills dulled by social media. I order a tea, the exchange goes smoothly, then I volley a bit of friendly banter to the barista and they have no idea how to handle conversation outside of the transaction. Either they say nothing, or give a one word answer that shuts the exchange down.
I have noticed that service workers in their 20s have had their conversation skills dulled by social media. I order a tea, the exchange goes smoothly, then I volley a bit of friendly banter to the barista and they have no idea how to handle conversation outside of the transaction. Either they say nothing, or give a one word answer that shuts the exchange down.
This isnt always true. Ive noticed that it holds true in the suburbs and in the city, but not in the small town that I frequent. Makes sense. Small town people arent burdened by a dehumanizing mass of humanity. We all chat with one another, whereas suburban people pull straight into their garages, and dont know their neighbors. And in a city, we dont have the bandwidth to humanize every single person that we come into contact with. But I may be wrong, and just seeing what I want to see, but I dont think so.
This isnt always true. Ive noticed that it holds true in the suburbs and in the city, but not in the small town that I frequent. Makes sense. Small town people arent burdened by a dehumanizing mass of humanity. We all chat with one another, whereas suburban people pull straight into their garages, and dont know their neighbors. And in a city, we dont have the bandwidth to humanize every single person that we come into contact with. But I may be wrong, and just seeing what I want to see, but I dont think so.
Another, related thing Ive noticed is that if I try to start a friendly conversation with a stranger in the suburbs, I often get a dead stare. Guessing that this is because they assume that I want something from them. That I am selling something. Its happened so many times that I had a shirt made that says "I dont want anything from you, Im just friendly."
Another, related thing Ive noticed is that if I try to start a friendly conversation with a stranger in the suburbs, I often get a dead stare. Guessing that this is because they assume that I want something from them. That I am selling something. Its happened so many times that I had a shirt made that says "I dont want anything from you, Im just friendly."
Like (15)
Reply
Share
Iuqddnk
Iuqddnk
Jul 25, 2023
As a 25 y/o I've noticed that the easiest way to start a conversation is by (genuinely) complimenting the other person. Most people put some thought into their physical appearance or hobby. Usually a compliment leads to decent small talk and a positive exchange. Another tip to build the social muscles.
As a 25 y/o I've noticed that the easiest way to start a conversation is by (genuinely) complimenting the other person. Most people put some thought into their physical appearance or hobby. Usually a compliment leads to decent small talk and a positive exchange. Another tip to build the social muscles.
Like (13)
Reply
Share
Top
Latest
Discussions

Rob Henderson

Rob Henderson

Rob Henderson

Rob Henderson

Rob Henderson

Rob Henderson

Rob Henderson

Rob Henderson

Rob Henderson

Rob Henderson


undefined subscriptions will be displayed on your profile (edit)
Skip for now
For your security, we need to re-authenticate you.
Click the link we sent to sasha.p.podolsky@gmail.com, orclick here to sign in.