

1
Book meeting
Book a meeting
Reminder: You are invited to attend my upcoming lecture in NYC about the psychology of power, dominance, and prestige on Friday, September 6, at 6:30pm.Tickets and info here.
Reminder: You are invited to attend my upcoming lecture in NYC about the psychology of power, dominance, and prestige on Friday, September 6, at 6:30pm.
.
Below is a transcript, lightly edited, with some highlights frommy appearance on The Mikhaila Peterson Podcast. We spoke aboutTroubled, dating advice, how to spot a psychopath, the logic of marriage and monogamy, and much more. Enjoy:
Below is a transcript, lightly edited, with some highlights from
. We spoke about
, dating advice, how to spot a psychopath, the logic of marriage and monogamy, and much more. Enjoy:
Mikhaila:Rob Henderson, welcome back to my podcast.
Rob Henderson, welcome back to my podcast.
Rob Henderson:Thanks, Mikhaila. Great to be here.
Thanks, Mikhaila. Great to be here.
Mikhaila:So, since we last spoke, you have published a book,Troubled.How's that going?
So, since we last spoke, you have published a book,
How's that going?
Rob Henderson:It's going well. I rememberlast time I spoke with you on the podcast, I was in the midst of writing it. At that time, I was also in the middle of my doctoral program and running some other side projects. While writingTroubled, I was plagued with a lot of self-doubt. My attention was spread pretty thin, and writing a memoir is difficult regardless of what's going on in your life. Anyway, the reception has been great. It's been well received, made multiple national bestseller lists, and beenwell-reviewedin multiple different outlets. Im happy with how it's going, and a lot of those doubts have dissipated.
It's going well. I remember
, I was in the midst of writing it. At that time, I was also in the middle of my doctoral program and running some other side projects. While writing
, I was plagued with a lot of self-doubt. My attention was spread pretty thin, and writing a memoir is difficult regardless of what's going on in your life. Anyway, the reception has been great. It's been well received, made multiple national bestseller lists, and been
in multiple different outlets. Im happy with how it's going, and a lot of those doubts have dissipated.
Mikhaila:Okay, well, that's fantastic. So, I wanted to start off this episode by getting into some of the stuff you discuss in the book. I can see why you wrote a memoir; there was plenty to write about. And I thought the way you outlined how you got interested in psychology from what you went through was interesting, so I want to cover that. You talked a bit aboutwell, let's start off with anyone who isn't familiar with you. Can you give a bit of a background about who you are and what it is you do?
Okay, well, that's fantastic. So, I wanted to start off this episode by getting into some of the stuff you discuss in the book. I can see why you wrote a memoir; there was plenty to write about. And I thought the way you outlined how you got interested in psychology from what you went through was interesting, so I want to cover that. You talked a bit aboutwell, let's start off with anyone who isn't familiar with you. Can you give a bit of a background about who you are and what it is you do?
Rob Henderson:Im a full-time writer on Substack, a columnist at the Boston Globe and The Free Press, and now a bestselling author. I did a PhD in Psychology at the University of Cambridge, graduated a couple of years ago. Before that, I majored in Psychology at Yale. But before all of this, my life was a lot different. Most of my book covers my unusual trajectory into higher education and beyond. I was born in Los Angeles and never knew my father. My mother and I lived in a car for a while; we were homeless for a time. Eventually, we settled in this slum apartment in LA. When I was three, my mother was strung out on drugs. Some neighbors noticed the extreme neglect that was going on and called the police. They came and saw the kind of squalor we were living in, where my mother would have visitors coming in and out of the apartment at all hours of the day and night, trading favors for drugs. The police came, and then some social workers came. Eventually, I was placed into the foster care system in LA, where I spent the next five years moving through seven different foster homes all throughout Los Angeles County. I describe some of those experiences in the early chapters of the book. Eventually, I was adopted just before my eighth birthday and moved in with this couple, this man and woman, and their biological daughterthey became my adoptive family. We settled in this blue-collar town in northern California called Red Bluff. Its a dusty, working-class town, and I didnt know this at the time, but I was kind of adopted into this community at an unusual point in American history. This was the late 90s, and I had a front-row seat into witnessing the ongoing fragmentation of working-class families across the U.S. My adoptive parents divorced about 18 months after the adoption.
Im a full-time writer on Substack, a columnist at the Boston Globe and The Free Press, and now a bestselling author. I did a PhD in Psychology at the University of Cambridge, graduated a couple of years ago. Before that, I majored in Psychology at Yale. But before all of this, my life was a lot different. Most of my book covers my unusual trajectory into higher education and beyond. I was born in Los Angeles and never knew my father. My mother and I lived in a car for a while; we were homeless for a time. Eventually, we settled in this slum apartment in LA. When I was three, my mother was strung out on drugs. Some neighbors noticed the extreme neglect that was going on and called the police. They came and saw the kind of squalor we were living in, where my mother would have visitors coming in and out of the apartment at all hours of the day and night, trading favors for drugs. The police came, and then some social workers came. Eventually, I was placed into the foster care system in LA, where I spent the next five years moving through seven different foster homes all throughout Los Angeles County. I describe some of those experiences in the early chapters of the book. Eventually, I was adopted just before my eighth birthday and moved in with this couple, this man and woman, and their biological daughterthey became my adoptive family. We settled in this blue-collar town in northern California called Red Bluff. Its a dusty, working-class town, and I didnt know this at the time, but I was kind of adopted into this community at an unusual point in American history. This was the late 90s, and I had a front-row seat into witnessing the ongoing fragmentation of working-class families across the U.S. My adoptive parents divorced about 18 months after the adoption.
Mikhaila:Oh my gosh.
Oh my gosh.
Rob Henderson:I was nine years old. The divorce was difficult, but I figured, okay, I still have my mom and my dad. But then my father, my adoptive father, subsequently stopped speaking with me after the divorce.
I was nine years old. The divorce was difficult, but I figured, okay, I still have my mom and my dad. But then my father, my adoptive father, subsequently stopped speaking with me after the divorce.
Mikhaila:Rob, this is so bad.
Rob, this is so bad.
Rob Henderson:It wasnt good. At nine years old, by this point, Im being raised by my adoptive moma single mom. We moved into this duplex. My mom was working full-time, trying to make ends meet. I was a latchkey kid. Id walk to and from school, my mom would still be working when I arrived home. I made a lot of other friends who were troublemakers like me. These kids, too, came from single-parent homes or broken families or homes. I had one friend who was raised by his grandmother because his mom was addicted to drugs and his dad was in prison. A lot of friends were raised by single moms with little adult oversight. What do little boys do when they dont have much supervision? We would smoke cigarettesnine years old, we started smoking cigarettesdrinking tequila. I actually tell a story in the book about how I started drinking beer in the foster homes when I was five and then moved on to the harder stuff at nine. I had friends who had older cousins who could hook us up with generic Vicodin or weed and beer. Sometimes wed just go to the gas station down the street and buy some cold medicine. If you take enough cold medicine, youll start to feel funny, and we learned that. We played the choking game. Theres a lot more to this, which we can get into, but Ill fast forward. When I was 17, I barely graduated high school, with a C-minus average. I knew I wasnt in a position to go to college, so I enlisted in the Air Force. There were some missteps and some setbacks along the way, but I did manage to become something resembling a mature adult. Then I went to Yale on the GI Bill, and onward from there.
It wasnt good. At nine years old, by this point, Im being raised by my adoptive moma single mom. We moved into this duplex. My mom was working full-time, trying to make ends meet. I was a latchkey kid. Id walk to and from school, my mom would still be working when I arrived home. I made a lot of other friends who were troublemakers like me. These kids, too, came from single-parent homes or broken families or homes. I had one friend who was raised by his grandmother because his mom was addicted to drugs and his dad was in prison. A lot of friends were raised by single moms with little adult oversight. What do little boys do when they dont have much supervision? We would smoke cigarettesnine years old, we started smoking cigarettesdrinking tequila. I actually tell a story in the book about how I started drinking beer in the foster homes when I was five and then moved on to the harder stuff at nine. I had friends who had older cousins who could hook us up with generic Vicodin or weed and beer. Sometimes wed just go to the gas station down the street and buy some cold medicine. If you take enough cold medicine, youll start to feel funny, and we learned that. We played the choking game. Theres a lot more to this, which we can get into, but Ill fast forward. When I was 17, I barely graduated high school, with a C-minus average. I knew I wasnt in a position to go to college, so I enlisted in the Air Force. There were some missteps and some setbacks along the way, but I did manage to become something resembling a mature adult. Then I went to Yale on the GI Bill, and onward from there.
My birth mother, she was from Seoul. She came to the U.S. as a young woman. Her father, my grandfather, sent her here to study, but she was in LA, and I think she got here in the early 80s, maybe the late 70s, and started partying. That life consumed her. She was deported back to South Korea when I was in the foster care system in LA. I was an American citizen, born in LA, so I stayed. She left. No one knew where my father was. A forensic psychologist asked her, Wheres this boys father? Youre not in a position to care for him. And she said she had no idea who my father was. Recently, I took this 23andMe genetic ancestry test. I learned that my father was Hispanic. He had ancestry from Mexico and from Spain. When I took this test, my first thought was, I wish Id known this when I was applying to college. That would have been helpful.
Mikhaila:Yeah, fair enough. Use whatever you can. Wow, okay, so this is why your book is calledTroubled.So, how did youhow did you get out of... I mean, a lot of people that grow up with that kind of trouble dont escape it. So, how did you manage to escape it? Were there things you read, or what changed your mind? Did you notice that there was something better? How did you get out of that?
Yeah, fair enough. Use whatever you can. Wow, okay, so this is why your book is called
So, how did youhow did you get out of... I mean, a lot of people that grow up with that kind of trouble dont escape it. So, how did you manage to escape it? Were there things you read, or what changed your mind? Did you notice that there was something better? How did you get out of that?
Rob Henderson:Theres always that question of nature and nurture. During my doctoral studies, I read a lot about cognitive psychology and psychometrics and those kinds of things. Of course, there is a genetic component to academic ability and intelligence. But one thing that I stress in my book is that academic ability is necessary but not sufficient to do well in school. So, in other words, you can have a really bright little kid, but if they are mired in squalor, chaos, and neglect, that potential will never reveal itself. Now, thats not the same thing as saying every kid is special and every kid is a genius if you just put them in the right environment. Im just saying that if you do have a kid who is a genius, but theyre in the wrong environment, youll never see that genius. Im not calling myself a genius, but you know what I mean.
Theres always that question of nature and nurture. During my doctoral studies, I read a lot about cognitive psychology and psychometrics and those kinds of things. Of course, there is a genetic component to academic ability and intelligence. But one thing that I stress in my book is that academic ability is necessary but not sufficient to do well in school. So, in other words, you can have a really bright little kid, but if they are mired in squalor, chaos, and neglect, that potential will never reveal itself. Now, thats not the same thing as saying every kid is special and every kid is a genius if you just put them in the right environment. Im just saying that if you do have a kid who is a genius, but theyre in the wrong environment, youll never see that genius. Im not calling myself a genius, but you know what I mean.
So, when I was in my final foster homethis was the seventh foster home I lived in in LAI was doing so badly in school, partially because I was changing homes all the time, changing school districts, changing schools. I didnt know how to read by this point. I was in second grade, I didnt know how to read. So, my social worker and the teacher, they spoke with each other, my foster mother. They sent a psychologist to test me to see if I had a learning disability. I took an IQ test, and I scoredI have the results now, so after I became an adult, my adoptive mother gave me this very thick file, all these documents from my time in the system. I scored below average overall. I scored way belowI scored like a 78 or something on the verbal section, more than a standard deviation below average. If you score highly on an IQ test, it means youre smart. If you score low on an IQ test, though, there could be a variety of different explanations for it. The reason why my scores were what they were is because no one was reading to me at home. And I had no reason to be motivated to try in school.
Mikhaila:I cant believe that they gave you an IQ test, being like, What could the problem be? Maybe its him. Wow. How didjust in the foster care system, why did you end upis that normal for a foster care kid to get switched that many times, or is that extremely unfortunate, or both?
I cant believe that they gave you an IQ test, being like, What could the problem be? Maybe its him. Wow. How didjust in the foster care system, why did you end upis that normal for a foster care kid to get switched that many times, or is that extremely unfortunate, or both?
Rob Henderson:Its both. Usually, what happens for kids in foster care is that someone from the family of origin eventually re-enters the picture. A lot of these kids are placed in care and raised by single moms, but the mom oftenits drug addiction or mental illness, or something, or mental illness brought on as a result of drug addiction. But a lot of these kids, they go into the system, maybe the mother sobers up, re-enters, and says, Okay, I can take care of the kid. Or maybe the father suddenly appears, or an aunt, or a grandmothersomeone eventually says, Okay, Ill take custody of the child. But in my case, that wasnt a possibility. The way that the foster system has been set up is so that if a child lives with one foster family for too long, and then the mother comes back and says, Oh, I can care for the child, but the childs been living with this foster family for one year or two years, this can create issues around loyalty, attachment, and the child would be reluctant to leave. Because now theyve been with this other family for two years or whatever it is, they might not want to go back to their family of origin. So, the system has organized itself so that the kid never stays in one place for too long, so theres never any attachment.
Its both. Usually, what happens for kids in foster care is that someone from the family of origin eventually re-enters the picture. A lot of these kids are placed in care and raised by single moms, but the mom oftenits drug addiction or mental illness, or something, or mental illness brought on as a result of drug addiction. But a lot of these kids, they go into the system, maybe the mother sobers up, re-enters, and says, Okay, I can take care of the kid. Or maybe the father suddenly appears, or an aunt, or a grandmothersomeone eventually says, Okay, Ill take custody of the child. But in my case, that wasnt a possibility. The way that the foster system has been set up is so that if a child lives with one foster family for too long, and then the mother comes back and says, Oh, I can care for the child, but the childs been living with this foster family for one year or two years, this can create issues around loyalty, attachment, and the child would be reluctant to leave. Because now theyve been with this other family for two years or whatever it is, they might not want to go back to their family of origin. So, the system has organized itself so that the kid never stays in one place for too long, so theres never any attachment.
Mikhaila:On purpose?
On purpose?
Rob Henderson:Its on purpose. They put a kid in one home for maybe six months, not longer than a year, then another home, then another home. The idea here is so that attachment never forms, so that if and when the family returns, the child will be perfectly happy to go back. But in my case, that was never going to happen. So, I should have actually been placed up for adoption much sooner, but the foster system is so overburdened that no one actually carefully read my file and recognized that I was never going to be returned to my mother.
Its on purpose. They put a kid in one home for maybe six months, not longer than a year, then another home, then another home. The idea here is so that attachment never forms, so that if and when the family returns, the child will be perfectly happy to go back. But in my case, that was never going to happen. So, I should have actually been placed up for adoption much sooner, but the foster system is so overburdened that no one actually carefully read my file and recognized that I was never going to be returned to my mother.
Mikhaila:And this is happening to a lot of kids even today? Thats horrifying.
And this is happening to a lot of kids even today? Thats horrifying.
Rob Henderson:Its probably at least as bad, if not worse. I mean, it was bad when I was going through it in the 90s, but I recently read thisarticle in NPRwhich stated that the number of foster kids who have entered the system as a result of parental drug use has doubled since the year 2000.
Its probably at least as bad, if not worse. I mean, it was bad when I was going through it in the 90s, but I recently read this
which stated that the number of foster kids who have entered the system as a result of parental drug use has doubled since the year 2000.
Mikhaila:You enlisted in the Air Force. But what happened to all your friends in high school? Do you know?
You enlisted in the Air Force. But what happened to all your friends in high school? Do you know?
Rob Henderson:There are multiple ways you can readTroubled. One would be this conventional bootstraps narrative of, Oh, there was this kid, and he was in foster care, and he grew up poor, and then he just turned his life around and became successful. That is a reasonable reading; that is what happened. But I wanted to also describe the lives of my friends and inform the reader that my outcome is not typical. Its not an outcome you can expect for most kids who grew up the way I did. I had five close friends in high school growing up. I had two friends raised by single moms, one friend raised by a single dad, another friendI mentioned he was raised by his grandmother. This is a very common picture of what families look like now in working-class and poor neighborhoods. At the end of my book I describe how two of my friends went to prison. I had another friend who was shot to death. I had another friend who worked kind of menial jobs for a while, and he was kind of in and out of community college. Eventually, he joined the Air Force, just like I had. He did six years, then went back to his old life. Hes okay, but hes still not flourishing. That is kind of the typical outcome of someoneeven if they join the military and get outthey do kind of return and revert back to old habits and live the life they were living before, although perhaps the bad habits arent quite as pronounced. Im the only one who graduated from college. I was by far the most academically oriented of all my friends. I was the only one who read books for pleasure. I would practice the math exercises in the textbook for fun. None of my friends did anything like that. I wouldn't do the homework, though, and I wouldn't actually do the things teachers asked me to. Anyway, I'm not convinced that even if you had put my friends in the most well-resourced private school with amazing parents, they would have gone on to college. I'm skeptical that that path is the right one for everyone. But I do think that had they been raised in a different environment, with different values, with different role models and incentives around them, the two friends who went to prison probably wouldn't have gone to prison. My one friend who was shot probably wouldn't have gotten shot. So, I don't know how much we can raise the ceiling as far as enhancing academic ability and educational mobility, but I think we could raise the floor as far as how far down a lot of these guys fall.
There are multiple ways you can read
. One would be this conventional bootstraps narrative of, Oh, there was this kid, and he was in foster care, and he grew up poor, and then he just turned his life around and became successful. That is a reasonable reading; that is what happened. But I wanted to also describe the lives of my friends and inform the reader that my outcome is not typical. Its not an outcome you can expect for most kids who grew up the way I did. I had five close friends in high school growing up. I had two friends raised by single moms, one friend raised by a single dad, another friendI mentioned he was raised by his grandmother. This is a very common picture of what families look like now in working-class and poor neighborhoods. At the end of my book I describe how two of my friends went to prison. I had another friend who was shot to death. I had another friend who worked kind of menial jobs for a while, and he was kind of in and out of community college. Eventually, he joined the Air Force, just like I had. He did six years, then went back to his old life. Hes okay, but hes still not flourishing. That is kind of the typical outcome of someoneeven if they join the military and get outthey do kind of return and revert back to old habits and live the life they were living before, although perhaps the bad habits arent quite as pronounced. Im the only one who graduated from college. I was by far the most academically oriented of all my friends. I was the only one who read books for pleasure. I would practice the math exercises in the textbook for fun. None of my friends did anything like that. I wouldn't do the homework, though, and I wouldn't actually do the things teachers asked me to. Anyway, I'm not convinced that even if you had put my friends in the most well-resourced private school with amazing parents, they would have gone on to college. I'm skeptical that that path is the right one for everyone. But I do think that had they been raised in a different environment, with different values, with different role models and incentives around them, the two friends who went to prison probably wouldn't have gone to prison. My one friend who was shot probably wouldn't have gotten shot. So, I don't know how much we can raise the ceiling as far as enhancing academic ability and educational mobility, but I think we could raise the floor as far as how far down a lot of these guys fall.
Mikhaila:Okay, let's talk about J.D. Vance. What do you think of him? What do you think of his book?
Okay, let's talk about J.D. Vance. What do you think of him? What do you think of his book?
Rob Henderson:I've met with J.D. a couple of times. I came away very impressed with him. By listening to him and speaking with him I could tell hes a smart guy. You cant start where he started and end up where he has without some smarts. He was helpful for me in the early stages when I was writingTroubled. To briefly tell the story of how we came to know each otherI wrotean essaythat theNew York Timespublished in 2018. It was a very brief summary of my life and some lessons I learned. J.D.'s wife Usha contacted me, saying that she really liked it, and she connected me with J.D.
I've met with J.D. a couple of times. I came away very impressed with him. By listening to him and speaking with him I could tell hes a smart guy. You cant start where he started and end up where he has without some smarts. He was helpful for me in the early stages when I was writing
. To briefly tell the story of how we came to know each otherI wrote
that the
published in 2018. It was a very brief summary of my life and some lessons I learned. J.D.'s wife Usha contacted me, saying that she really liked it, and she connected me with J.D.
Mikhaila:Oh, cool.
Oh, cool.
Rob Henderson:He and I had a long phone call, and he gave me some advice because by that point, literary agents were contacting me as a result of that op-ed, asking me if I wanted to write a book. J.D. shared some writing advice and some pointers on navigating the publishing industry. He also gave my book a very nice blurb.
He and I had a long phone call, and he gave me some advice because by that point, literary agents were contacting me as a result of that op-ed, asking me if I wanted to write a book. J.D. shared some writing advice and some pointers on navigating the publishing industry. He also gave my book a very nice blurb.
Mikhaila:Wow.
Wow.
Rob Henderson:Hes an example of starting as poor as you can be in the U.S. in difficult circumstances in an impoverished part of Ohio. And through effort and good fortune, he enlisted in the Marines, went on to Ohio State, and then to Yale Law School. He had a successful business career. A classic American rags to riches story. For those reasons, on a personal level, I cant help but like the guy. And it's nice to have a non-geriatric boomer on a major party ticket. Hes the first millennial on a major party ticket. He's 39, he's young, he's got a wife and small children, and there is a youthful aura around him that you don't get from someone like Trump, and or someone like Walz or even Harris.
Hes an example of starting as poor as you can be in the U.S. in difficult circumstances in an impoverished part of Ohio. And through effort and good fortune, he enlisted in the Marines, went on to Ohio State, and then to Yale Law School. He had a successful business career. A classic American rags to riches story. For those reasons, on a personal level, I cant help but like the guy. And it's nice to have a non-geriatric boomer on a major party ticket. Hes the first millennial on a major party ticket. He's 39, he's young, he's got a wife and small children, and there is a youthful aura around him that you don't get from someone like Trump, and or someone like Walz or even Harris.
Mikhaila:Its exciting. Okay, I want to get into psychology, but first, before we do that, you filmed a course for Peterson Academy.
Its exciting. Okay, I want to get into psychology, but first, before we do that, you filmed a course for Peterson Academy.
Rob Henderson:I did.
I did.
Mikhaila:We just showed you the trailer. What did you think?
We just showed you the trailer. What did you think?
Rob Henderson:You know, when you suggested we watch the trailer, I was nervous. I'm like, "I'm going to be embarrassed." It's always hard for me to watch myself on camera, but as soon as you started playing it, I was like, "Whoa, this is really good." I wanted to share it right away. The style, the cinematography, the musicit sounded like it was scored by Hans Zimmer. I watched some of the other trailers; it looks cinematic in quality.
You know, when you suggested we watch the trailer, I was nervous. I'm like, "I'm going to be embarrassed." It's always hard for me to watch myself on camera, but as soon as you started playing it, I was like, "Whoa, this is really good." I wanted to share it right away. The style, the cinematography, the musicit sounded like it was scored by Hans Zimmer. I watched some of the other trailers; it looks cinematic in quality.
Mikhaila:I'm glad you liked it. Your courseit's like eight hours of content, but we've watched a lot of your course. Your course is really good.
I'm glad you liked it. Your courseit's like eight hours of content, but we've watched a lot of your course. Your course is really good.
Rob Henderson:Thank you.
Thank you.
Mikhaila:It's really goodpsychology of status.
It's really goodpsychology of status.
Rob Henderson:Psychology of social status. I did six lectures, and it's a naturally interesting topic. I love psychology, and I love delving into this topic. I think that in polite society, we try to shy away from this idea of prestige and being well-regarded by other people, and this is a topic that psychologists like to study and delve into. So, I figured, okay, let's surface some of this. It was fun teaching that course.
Psychology of social status. I did six lectures, and it's a naturally interesting topic. I love psychology, and I love delving into this topic. I think that in polite society, we try to shy away from this idea of prestige and being well-regarded by other people, and this is a topic that psychologists like to study and delve into. So, I figured, okay, let's surface some of this. It was fun teaching that course.
Mikhaila:Okay, good. Well, we're glad to have you on board. So, okay, for your psychology background, I want to ask you some relationship questions. Are there any statistics showing that for a subset of people, non-monogamous relationships work, or is that just what some non-monogamous people say?
Okay, good. Well, we're glad to have you on board. So, okay, for your psychology background, I want to ask you some relationship questions. Are there any statistics showing that for a subset of people, non-monogamous relationships work, or is that just what some non-monogamous people say?
Rob Henderson:What are the predictors of a successful non-monogamous relationship? I'm sure there are people who can make it work. I know at least one couple who seems to be making a go of it and seems like it's working for them. But for those types of people, they are psychologically atypical. They're on the tail ends of multiple bell curves. They tend to be very smart in terms of IQ. They tend to be conscientioushigh impulse control, well-educated, materially well off.
What are the predictors of a successful non-monogamous relationship? I'm sure there are people who can make it work. I know at least one couple who seems to be making a go of it and seems like it's working for them. But for those types of people, they are psychologically atypical. They're on the tail ends of multiple bell curves. They tend to be very smart in terms of IQ. They tend to be conscientioushigh impulse control, well-educated, materially well off.
Mikhaila:Conscientious, really?
Conscientious, really?
Rob Henderson:I think for those types of people, they can navigate the complexities of multiple relationships inside marriages or side relationships in their marriage. But I think for most people who don't score highly on all of those things and who aren't particularly high in socioeconomic status and so forth, it'sit can be jealousy and betrayal and all of those feelings that arise. That's hard to deal with for anyone, but if you are an unusual person, you can find a way to make that work. This, to me, is kind of a luxury belief, where if you are very well off, very well educated, you have money, you have all these attributes going for you, then you can experiment. Its the same with drug use. There are people who can experiment with drugs and enjoy it, and it won't completely destroy their lives. But a lot of affluent and educated people say, "We should decriminalize all hard drugs," because they, in this kind of self-centered way, think, "Well, I can do it, so anyone can do it," and that's just not the case.
I think for those types of people, they can navigate the complexities of multiple relationships inside marriages or side relationships in their marriage. But I think for most people who don't score highly on all of those things and who aren't particularly high in socioeconomic status and so forth, it'sit can be jealousy and betrayal and all of those feelings that arise. That's hard to deal with for anyone, but if you are an unusual person, you can find a way to make that work. This, to me, is kind of a luxury belief, where if you are very well off, very well educated, you have money, you have all these attributes going for you, then you can experiment. Its the same with drug use. There are people who can experiment with drugs and enjoy it, and it won't completely destroy their lives. But a lot of affluent and educated people say, "We should decriminalize all hard drugs," because they, in this kind of self-centered way, think, "Well, I can do it, so anyone can do it," and that's just not the case.
Mikhaila:So, you think decriminalization is a bad idea?
So, you think decriminalization is a bad idea?
Rob Henderson:Hard drugs. The idea of decriminalizing crack and heroin and meth and all those things would be a huge mistake. In fact, Oregon recently learned this. In 2020, Oregon decriminalized all drugs in the wake of the defund the police movement, and then overdoses skyrocketed, deaths as a result of drug use. A lot of the cities, a lot of parts of Portland, became open-air drug dens. A couple of months ago, they recently reintroduced legislation to recriminalize drug use. It was a failed experiment. Sounds nice on paper, but it doesn't work.
Hard drugs. The idea of decriminalizing crack and heroin and meth and all those things would be a huge mistake. In fact, Oregon recently learned this. In 2020, Oregon decriminalized all drugs in the wake of the defund the police movement, and then overdoses skyrocketed, deaths as a result of drug use. A lot of the cities, a lot of parts of Portland, became open-air drug dens. A couple of months ago, they recently reintroduced legislation to recriminalize drug use. It was a failed experiment. Sounds nice on paper, but it doesn't work.
Mikhaila:That's interesting. I feel like my view on that changed. I think originally I probably had the naive view that kind of let people do whatever they want, they'll be fine, less government is better. But that is me coming from my perspective without understanding what somebody else would do in that type of situation.
That's interesting. I feel like my view on that changed. I think originally I probably had the naive view that kind of let people do whatever they want, they'll be fine, less government is better. But that is me coming from my perspective without understanding what somebody else would do in that type of situation.
Rob Henderson:Either way, people are going to suffer. If you criminalize drugs, yes, people are going to be arrested, people are going to be harassed by law enforcement, and so on. But if you decriminalize it, you're just going to increase the number of people who do enough drugs to the point where they destroy everything around them and end up dead on the street. So we have two ugly options before us, which one do we choose?
Either way, people are going to suffer. If you criminalize drugs, yes, people are going to be arrested, people are going to be harassed by law enforcement, and so on. But if you decriminalize it, you're just going to increase the number of people who do enough drugs to the point where they destroy everything around them and end up dead on the street. So we have two ugly options before us, which one do we choose?
Mikhaila:Yeah. Okay, so do you think the red-pilled view that men are polyamorous? Because I feel like a lot of these guys are like, "Go back in time, and these high-value men, they had multiple wives, and that's how we're supposed to be as men."
Yeah. Okay, so do you think the red-pilled view that men are polyamorous? Because I feel like a lot of these guys are like, "Go back in time, and these high-value men, they had multiple wives, and that's how we're supposed to be as men."
Rob Henderson:Im inclined to take a birds-eye view of human history. Ill just offer a stylized summary of human evolution and relationships: Our closest shared ancestor we have in common with chimpanzees lived about six million years ago. Their mating system was similar to chimpanzees, where you do have a dominant male who does most of the mating with most of the females. Some of the other males occasionally find a mate, but one dominant male has most of the sex with most females. About 300,000 years ago, we split off the evolutionary branch and evolved into Homo sapiens, we became nomadic hunter-gatherers living in relatively small groups. During this period, humans became primarily monogamous. The reason is because, to successfully hunt large animals and be successful in warfare with other groups, the males in a group had to cooperate with one another. If one man monopolizes the women, the other males would gang up and kill him. Other primates arent capable of that kind of advanced cooperation, of planned conspiratorial killing of bullies and selfish males. So the implicit agreement among men was like, "Okay, well, we have to hunt animals. We have to defend ourselves from other groups." And this gave rise to a rudimentary form of monogamous pair-bonding, or marriage, where no male could have lots of wives. After the agricultural revolution about 12 thousand years ago, humans established city-states and stationary civilizations. Now men could stockpile resources and amass large armies. This gave rise to kings and pharaohs and emperors who could obtain a lot of wives. Modern humans have existed for about 300,000 years, and of that 300,000 years, humans spent 97% of that time in hunter-gatherer, mostly monogamous, societies. So, when these red-pill guys say, "Polygamy is how things have always been," they are describing a brief blip in human evolutionary history. About 2,000 years ago, with the rise of ChristianityI'm talking about in the Western worldmonogamy was re-established as the norm. So as human beings, we have been mostly monogamous with some exceptions. If you look at the ethnographies of anthropologists who visit modern indigenous hunter-gatherer communities, marriage exists. Yes, theres sometimes philandering, sometimes cheating, sometimes a high-status male gets an extra wife, but they still tend to prize monogamous marriage.
Im inclined to take a birds-eye view of human history. Ill just offer a stylized summary of human evolution and relationships: Our closest shared ancestor we have in common with chimpanzees lived about six million years ago. Their mating system was similar to chimpanzees, where you do have a dominant male who does most of the mating with most of the females. Some of the other males occasionally find a mate, but one dominant male has most of the sex with most females. About 300,000 years ago, we split off the evolutionary branch and evolved into Homo sapiens, we became nomadic hunter-gatherers living in relatively small groups. During this period, humans became primarily monogamous. The reason is because, to successfully hunt large animals and be successful in warfare with other groups, the males in a group had to cooperate with one another. If one man monopolizes the women, the other males would gang up and kill him. Other primates arent capable of that kind of advanced cooperation, of planned conspiratorial killing of bullies and selfish males. So the implicit agreement among men was like, "Okay, well, we have to hunt animals. We have to defend ourselves from other groups." And this gave rise to a rudimentary form of monogamous pair-bonding, or marriage, where no male could have lots of wives. After the agricultural revolution about 12 thousand years ago, humans established city-states and stationary civilizations. Now men could stockpile resources and amass large armies. This gave rise to kings and pharaohs and emperors who could obtain a lot of wives. Modern humans have existed for about 300,000 years, and of that 300,000 years, humans spent 97% of that time in hunter-gatherer, mostly monogamous, societies. So, when these red-pill guys say, "Polygamy is how things have always been," they are describing a brief blip in human evolutionary history. About 2,000 years ago, with the rise of ChristianityI'm talking about in the Western worldmonogamy was re-established as the norm. So as human beings, we have been mostly monogamous with some exceptions. If you look at the ethnographies of anthropologists who visit modern indigenous hunter-gatherer communities, marriage exists. Yes, theres sometimes philandering, sometimes cheating, sometimes a high-status male gets an extra wife, but they still tend to prize monogamous marriage.
Mikhaila:That is interesting.
That is interesting.
Rob Henderson:Independent in multiple cultures, marriage arose as a norm. It's not like marriage started somewhere and spread through; it was sort of independently this idea of a man and a woman coming together, committing to one another, raising children together. This is more or less a human universal.
Independent in multiple cultures, marriage arose as a norm. It's not like marriage started somewhere and spread through; it was sort of independently this idea of a man and a woman coming together, committing to one another, raising children together. This is more or less a human universal.
Mikhaila:Okay. Let's talk about psychopaths for a sec.
Okay. Let's talk about psychopaths for a sec.
Rob Henderson:Sure.
Sure.
Mikhaila:Are there any recommendations you have for young women on how to identify psychopathic men?
Are there any recommendations you have for young women on how to identify psychopathic men?
Rob Henderson:If you read the research on psychopaths and narcissists, some findings indicate that if someone is a little too charming or too magnetic, that in itself can be a warning sign.
If you read the research on psychopaths and narcissists, some findings indicate that if someone is a little too charming or too magnetic, that in itself can be a warning sign.
Mikhaila:If you like them too much?
If you like them too much?
Rob Henderson:Especially if its an immediate liking, a glittering first impression. Some researchers showed study participants images of people making facial expressions and asked them, "Which of these faces appears to be most authentic to you, most genuine in terms of its emotional expression?" The people who were making these expressionsthe images that these participants were seeingthe researchers collected their scores on the dark triad and found that participants rated the faces of people who scored highly on dark triad traits as the most genuine. In other words, the people who were the least authentic were rated as the most authentic in terms of their facial expressions. Often, people who are high on these kinds of traits know that there are certain kinds of expressions they can make that are charismatic or that they can over-exaggerate to look particularly genuine in order to win people over.
Especially if its an immediate liking, a glittering first impression. Some researchers showed study participants images of people making facial expressions and asked them, "Which of these faces appears to be most authentic to you, most genuine in terms of its emotional expression?" The people who were making these expressionsthe images that these participants were seeingthe researchers collected their scores on the dark triad and found that participants rated the faces of people who scored highly on dark triad traits as the most genuine. In other words, the people who were the least authentic were rated as the most authentic in terms of their facial expressions. Often, people who are high on these kinds of traits know that there are certain kinds of expressions they can make that are charismatic or that they can over-exaggerate to look particularly genuine in order to win people over.
Mikhaila:So if someone is a little too strong in their personality?
So if someone is a little too strong in their personality?
Rob Henderson:Right. Another thing you can do is pay attention to their close relationships. Have they had any serious relationships in the past, romantically? Do they have a group of close friends theyve known for a long time? What are their relationships like with their friends, with their family, with their parents? Often, you'll find that people who are psychopathically oriented have difficulty maintaining prolonged social relationships. They often have difficulty in their professional lifethey can't stay in one job for too long. They're often very charismatic at first, but the longer you get to know them, the less likable they become over time. People tend to flee from them or distance themselves once they discover who they really are.
Right. Another thing you can do is pay attention to their close relationships. Have they had any serious relationships in the past, romantically? Do they have a group of close friends theyve known for a long time? What are their relationships like with their friends, with their family, with their parents? Often, you'll find that people who are psychopathically oriented have difficulty maintaining prolonged social relationships. They often have difficulty in their professional lifethey can't stay in one job for too long. They're often very charismatic at first, but the longer you get to know them, the less likable they become over time. People tend to flee from them or distance themselves once they discover who they really are.
Mikhaila:Terrifying.
Terrifying.
Rob Henderson:Yeah.
Yeah.
Mikhaila:I wonder if that's something that you also, as a female, just kind of need to learn eventually. I mean, there are stats behind thatlike young women have a harder time with that, right? Its harder to identify for them. Maybe you just have to get older.
I wonder if that's something that you also, as a female, just kind of need to learn eventually. I mean, there are stats behind thatlike young women have a harder time with that, right? Its harder to identify for them. Maybe you just have to get older.
Rob Henderson:Once you have some experience, you recognize those signs and realize, "Okay, I know this guy seems interesting, but this probably wouldn't go anywhere." I think guys have this too, right? With physically attractive women who have a narcissistic personality style or score highly on various personality conditions, men also can find certain kinds of women very alluring. Over time, they kind of learn to recognize those warning signs too. A good friend of mine, a psychologist, said that in any good fictional drama, almost all of the characters have a personality disorder. I think it's truethere's something so interesting about watching it, but once you sort of invite it into your life, you know...
Once you have some experience, you recognize those signs and realize, "Okay, I know this guy seems interesting, but this probably wouldn't go anywhere." I think guys have this too, right? With physically attractive women who have a narcissistic personality style or score highly on various personality conditions, men also can find certain kinds of women very alluring. Over time, they kind of learn to recognize those warning signs too. A good friend of mine, a psychologist, said that in any good fictional drama, almost all of the characters have a personality disorder. I think it's truethere's something so interesting about watching it, but once you sort of invite it into your life, you know...
Mikhaila:Yeah, then it's hectic.
Yeah, then it's hectic.
Rob Henderson:Yes.
Yes.
Mikhaila:YeahSuccession.
Yeah
Rob Henderson:Yes, exactly.
Yes, exactly.
Mikhaila:Perfect. Okay, for advicewhat advice would you give to someone struggling with dating in the modern world? Where do you start?
Perfect. Okay, for advicewhat advice would you give to someone struggling with dating in the modern world? Where do you start?
Rob Henderson:Naturally, we start out looking for signs of physical attractiveness. But it seems to be more pronounced now in the era of the internet and social media. So, I think a very easy first pass is just physically trying to look good. Guys will ask me for advice, and I'm like, "You could start with just going to the gym, getting a haircut, getting some clothes that fit." Basic things.
Naturally, we start out looking for signs of physical attractiveness. But it seems to be more pronounced now in the era of the internet and social media. So, I think a very easy first pass is just physically trying to look good. Guys will ask me for advice, and I'm like, "You could start with just going to the gym, getting a haircut, getting some clothes that fit." Basic things.
Get involved in social activities and hobbies and situations where you'll be around people who have the same kinds of interests as you. If you like working out, you can do CrossFit. If you like reading, join book clubs. And if you aren't naturally extroverted, just putting yourself in more social environments in itself will get you part of the way there. Your odds of meeting a romantic partner are zero if you're sitting at home with your phone, but they go up to whatever, 0.1% just by going outside, right? Just putting yourself in more social situations, making some friends, being social.
A lot of guys are like, "Oh, I just need to get a girlfriend, I just need to learn how to talk to girls." What I'll tell them is you don't need to learn how to talk to girlsyou need to learn how to talk to people. Go out and just have conversations. Don't be a shy, withdrawn person, even if that's how you naturally are. Try to push against that and have conversations with your Uber driver, with customer service people, with your barber, with your friends. If you have friends, talk to them more often, call them up. Just exercise that muscle of being social, being aware and engaged with the people around you, and that over time will justyou can transition that ability into once you meet someone who you might find interesting, you'll be able to talk to them and not stress out about it.
Mikhaila:Are there ways that people can train extroversion just by communicating with other people? Is it always going to be painful for those people, or are they eventually going to get more extroverted? How does that work?
Are there ways that people can train extroversion just by communicating with other people? Is it always going to be painful for those people, or are they eventually going to get more extroverted? How does that work?
Rob Henderson:When you ask introverts to behave in an extroverted way, they are usually happier than they anticipate. This makes sense. We are social creatures who evolved to be around people. The idea of the modern idea of privacy, which I'm a fan of, didn't really exist until very recently in history. If you look at small-scale traditional societies, there's almost no privacyeveryone knows what everyone else is up to, and we evolved in that type of environment. You can view extroversion and sociality as similar to going to the gym. Even for people who enjoy working out, there's always that little bit of, "Do I want to do this today? Maybe I'll skip and just go tomorrow." But then you do it, and you usually feel better after. Over time, you can train yourself to think about being social in that way, like, "Okay, getting started is going to be painful, but then you do it, and you know you're going to feel good, so just go for it."
When you ask introverts to behave in an extroverted way, they are usually happier than they anticipate. This makes sense. We are social creatures who evolved to be around people. The idea of the modern idea of privacy, which I'm a fan of, didn't really exist until very recently in history. If you look at small-scale traditional societies, there's almost no privacyeveryone knows what everyone else is up to, and we evolved in that type of environment. You can view extroversion and sociality as similar to going to the gym. Even for people who enjoy working out, there's always that little bit of, "Do I want to do this today? Maybe I'll skip and just go tomorrow." But then you do it, and you usually feel better after. Over time, you can train yourself to think about being social in that way, like, "Okay, getting started is going to be painful, but then you do it, and you know you're going to feel good, so just go for it."
Mikhaila:Have you taken a personality test?
Have you taken a personality test?
Rob Henderson:I took your dads  Understanding Myself [resultshere]. I took another one pretty recently, and yeah, so I've taken two tests.
I took your dads  Understanding Myself [results
]. I took another one pretty recently, and yeah, so I've taken two tests.
Mikhaila:Were they both Big Five?
Were they both Big Five?
Rob Henderson:They were both Big Five. One of themthis other onetheres the HEXACO model.
They were both Big Five. One of themthis other onetheres the HEXACO model.
Mikhaila:Oh yeah, honesty-humility.
Oh yeah, honesty-humility.
Rob Henderson:Yeah, and then there's the old school, like Myers-Briggs stuff and enneagrams and all these other kind of weird personality things.
Yeah, and then there's the old school, like Myers-Briggs stuff and enneagrams and all these other kind of weird personality things.
Mikhaila:Oh, I need to take the HEXACO one. I haven'tIve been true to my dad's, and I know that his doesn't have honesty and humility in there.
Oh, I need to take the HEXACO one. I haven'tIve been true to my dad's, and I know that his doesn't have honesty and humility in there.
Rob Henderson:I remember I tweeted something about the HEXACO model, and your dad posted a comment indicating that he was a little skeptical.
I remember I tweeted something about the HEXACO model, and your dad posted a comment indicating that he was a little skeptical.
Mikhaila:I think he's less skeptical now.
I think he's less skeptical now.
Rob Henderson:Oh, really?
Oh, really?
Mikhaila:We had a conversation recently where he said, "Yeah, we are missing the" because kind of the dark triad doesnt come out as easily in his Big Five model.
We had a conversation recently where he said, "Yeah, we are missing the" because kind of the dark triad doesnt come out as easily in his Big Five model.
Rob Henderson:Right.
Right.
Mikhaila:Thats what you said, anyway.
Thats what you said, anyway.
Rob Henderson:Yeah, on the Big Five, the dark triad is inversely correlated with agreeableness. So, disagreeable people are usually pretty high on the dark triad. But then, the HEXACO model, the honesty-humility factor, is even more strongly inversely correlated. So, if you're very high on honesty and humility, you're low on the dark triad. If you're high on the dark triad, you're low on those two traitshonesty and humility.
Yeah, on the Big Five, the dark triad is inversely correlated with agreeableness. So, disagreeable people are usually pretty high on the dark triad. But then, the HEXACO model, the honesty-humility factor, is even more strongly inversely correlated. So, if you're very high on honesty and humility, you're low on the dark triad. If you're high on the dark triad, you're low on those two traitshonesty and humility.
Mikhaila:So, do people just lie on these Dark Triad questionnaires, though? Can't you just trick it?
So, do people just lie on these Dark Triad questionnaires, though? Can't you just trick it?
Rob Henderson:In theory, yes, but people don't seem to do that. I had this conversation with a professor who studies narcissism and dark triad personality traits, and I asked, "Why dont narcissists just lie in these studies, who wants to be thought of as a narcissist?" And his response was, "They like knowing that they're this way."
In theory, yes, but people don't seem to do that. I had this conversation with a professor who studies narcissism and dark triad personality traits, and I asked, "Why dont narcissists just lie in these studies, who wants to be thought of as a narcissist?" And his response was, "They like knowing that they're this way."
Mikhaila:Or they're proud of the fact that they're good at manipulating.
Or they're proud of the fact that they're good at manipulating.
Rob Henderson:Thats right. They think that they are the realists. They think everyone is out there constantly manipulating other people, and that everyone else is lying. Narcissists and psychopaths think thatyou'rethe liar for not scoring high on the dark triad or for scoring low or high on the honesty-humility trait. They think that they're the ones who are being honest when they do these tests.
Thats right. They think that they are the realists. They think everyone is out there constantly manipulating other people, and that everyone else is lying. Narcissists and psychopaths think that
the liar for not scoring high on the dark triad or for scoring low or high on the honesty-humility trait. They think that they're the ones who are being honest when they do these tests.
Mikhaila:Wow. Crazy. People are crazy. Okay, what was the strangest thing for you about leaving the blue-collar, troubled situation you were in and going somewhere like Cambridge? Was that a bit of a shock?
Wow. Crazy. People are crazy. Okay, what was the strangest thing for you about leaving the blue-collar, troubled situation you were in and going somewhere like Cambridge? Was that a bit of a shock?
Rob Henderson:People think of you as the last thing you did. So by the time I got to Cambridge, I was in grad school doing a PhD, and conversations would arise. One of the first questions is, "Where did you study for undergrad?" I did my bachelors at Yale, and so people just assumed, "Oh, you were groomed to attend Cambridge." But when I was at Yale, that was really the culture shockgoing from the military into Yale. I spent two chapters dwelling at length on the culture shock I had at Yale. It was a little bit of a culture shock at Cambridge as well, but after doing undergrad, it was less so. It was tough. I mean, for a lot of reasons, it was difficult academically. I was a horrible high school student. I went to this college, and all the other studentsmany of them had been training their whole lives to go to a place like that. They went to private schools, had private tutors, everything going for them, and the coursework was actually quite rigorous. A lot of people, when they study psychology, think of it as this abstract, unseriouspeople navel-gazing or something. But psychology, especially if you do research methods and statistics and empirical stuff, it can get pretty dense. I was taking neuroscience courses too, and that first semester, that first year, academically, I struggled a lot until I found my footing. This is anothergoing back to the earlier pointthat just because you have the intrinsic ability, if it's not nurtured and cultivated properly, the person can still struggle and have setbacks.
People think of you as the last thing you did. So by the time I got to Cambridge, I was in grad school doing a PhD, and conversations would arise. One of the first questions is, "Where did you study for undergrad?" I did my bachelors at Yale, and so people just assumed, "Oh, you were groomed to attend Cambridge." But when I was at Yale, that was really the culture shockgoing from the military into Yale. I spent two chapters dwelling at length on the culture shock I had at Yale. It was a little bit of a culture shock at Cambridge as well, but after doing undergrad, it was less so. It was tough. I mean, for a lot of reasons, it was difficult academically. I was a horrible high school student. I went to this college, and all the other studentsmany of them had been training their whole lives to go to a place like that. They went to private schools, had private tutors, everything going for them, and the coursework was actually quite rigorous. A lot of people, when they study psychology, think of it as this abstract, unseriouspeople navel-gazing or something. But psychology, especially if you do research methods and statistics and empirical stuff, it can get pretty dense. I was taking neuroscience courses too, and that first semester, that first year, academically, I struggled a lot until I found my footing. This is anothergoing back to the earlier pointthat just because you have the intrinsic ability, if it's not nurtured and cultivated properly, the person can still struggle and have setbacks.
Then there was the cultural component. The students, a lot of the professors, administrators, and grad studentsthey just had so little familiarity with the people they claimed to care about: marginalized people, poor people, prison inmates, and so on. They just never had a 15-minute conversation with someone who doesn't have a bachelor's degree. They just have no idea what life is like outside of that environment. Interacting with people like that over and overwhere decriminalizing drugs or defunding the police and these kinds of ideas like decarceration, just releasing all the prisonerswas seen as reasonable. Like, it's not, "What is it, they're in prison and it just makes them worse criminals or something?" It was just a lot of naivet that I had to get used to. But over time, I was able to find my footing and find friends and stuff, but yeah, that first year was really rough.
Mikhaila:Did people argue with you?
Did people argue with you?
Rob Henderson:Yeah. I entered Yale in 2015, and that was kind of like the start of when whatever political correctness or wokeness started to spill out of the universities. I grew up thinking the word "racism" just meant mistreating people based on the color of their skin or their ethnicity. And then suddenly, I got to Yale, and racism got redefined through verbal trickery into "power plus prejudice," or basically, only white people can be racist. And I was like, "Whoa, this is a new one. Okay." And then I tried multiple times to get people to explain this to me because it didnt really make sense. And then, you know, people just got upset with me. If you even question these things, often, you know, people didn't learn how to defend their views because everyone around them agrees with them.
Yeah. I entered Yale in 2015, and that was kind of like the start of when whatever political correctness or wokeness started to spill out of the universities. I grew up thinking the word "racism" just meant mistreating people based on the color of their skin or their ethnicity. And then suddenly, I got to Yale, and racism got redefined through verbal trickery into "power plus prejudice," or basically, only white people can be racist. And I was like, "Whoa, this is a new one. Okay." And then I tried multiple times to get people to explain this to me because it didnt really make sense. And then, you know, people just got upset with me. If you even question these things, often, you know, people didn't learn how to defend their views because everyone around them agrees with them.
Mikhaila:Wow. Yeah, I went to university slightly before that. I quit, though. I was at Concordia, just like no-name university in Montreal, and it was woke in 200I think it was 2012. It was already woke, so I kind of entered into that. It was an art school.
Wow. Yeah, I went to university slightly before that. I quit, though. I was at Concordia, just like no-name university in Montreal, and it was woke in 200I think it was 2012. It was already woke, so I kind of entered into that. It was an art school.
Rob Henderson:Okay.
Okay.
Mikhaila:So, I think it got infiltrated first, and Montreal is in rough shape right now, but it was woke. So, I was takingI was taking classics, and then I was suddenly in the classics course through a feminist lens. I was like, "Thats not what I signed up for." Like HomerI was studying Homer through a feminist perspective, and I was like, "What? What is this?" And I had to leave that university because it was so bad. It was crazy. My psychology courses were terrible too. The psychology professorI think part of the reason I was like, "We need an online university where things are taught properly"my psychology professor told us rats werent social creatures because they lived in cages. Im not even joking. That was my first-year psychology class that I had to travel like an hour to. I was like, "What?"
So, I think it got infiltrated first, and Montreal is in rough shape right now, but it was woke. So, I was takingI was taking classics, and then I was suddenly in the classics course through a feminist lens. I was like, "Thats not what I signed up for." Like HomerI was studying Homer through a feminist perspective, and I was like, "What? What is this?" And I had to leave that university because it was so bad. It was crazy. My psychology courses were terrible too. The psychology professorI think part of the reason I was like, "We need an online university where things are taught properly"my psychology professor told us rats werent social creatures because they lived in cages. Im not even joking. That was my first-year psychology class that I had to travel like an hour to. I was like, "What?"
Rob Henderson:I mean, it wasnt just like the wokeness that I saw. Even likeso, like, to give an example of something weird and peculiar that wasnt really like woke or political in any way, I remember in one of my psychology classes, we learned of this study where, you knowso it was a moral psychology course, and it was about sort of cultural differences in moral psychology, peoples intuitions about right and wrong. And one of the scenarios in the study that was presented to participants was this case of incest between a brother and sister. "Is this wrong?" And this was like almost a universal where in countries like India and Brazil and in the U.S., kind of universally, people said that this was wrong. There was one exception, one group who were more likely to say incest was okay versus not okay.
I mean, it wasnt just like the wokeness that I saw. Even likeso, like, to give an example of something weird and peculiar that wasnt really like woke or political in any way, I remember in one of my psychology classes, we learned of this study where, you knowso it was a moral psychology course, and it was about sort of cultural differences in moral psychology, peoples intuitions about right and wrong. And one of the scenarios in the study that was presented to participants was this case of incest between a brother and sister. "Is this wrong?" And this was like almost a universal where in countries like India and Brazil and in the U.S., kind of universally, people said that this was wrong. There was one exception, one group who were more likely to say incest was okay versus not okay.
Mikhaila:Okay.
Okay.
Rob Henderson:And these were students at elite universities. And when I learnedI read this study, which was done in the 90s. And so, you know, this 20 years later, Im at Yale, and so I decided to just ask classmates and friends. Im like, yeah, so I told themI read the scenario or just recalled it from memory of just, you know, this brother and sister were interested in each other, no chance of pregnancy, but theyre, you know, theyre romantically attracted. And most students said yes. Like, they said, "No ones getting hurt, no ones suffering, and they both want to do it, why not?" And Im like, "Ooh, okay." Like, its so obvious that this is not okay, but it was this very sort of individualistic, "If it feels good, do it. If no ones getting hurt," that kind of thing. Just a very different kind of moral vision, I guess, than I was used to.
And these were students at elite universities. And when I learnedI read this study, which was done in the 90s. And so, you know, this 20 years later, Im at Yale, and so I decided to just ask classmates and friends. Im like, yeah, so I told themI read the scenario or just recalled it from memory of just, you know, this brother and sister were interested in each other, no chance of pregnancy, but theyre, you know, theyre romantically attracted. And most students said yes. Like, they said, "No ones getting hurt, no ones suffering, and they both want to do it, why not?" And Im like, "Ooh, okay." Like, its so obvious that this is not okay, but it was this very sort of individualistic, "If it feels good, do it. If no ones getting hurt," that kind of thing. Just a very different kind of moral vision, I guess, than I was used to.
Mikhaila:Okay, do you know anything about how hookup culturebecause I know a lot of, especially Gen Zs, because its gotten worseit was already bad enough when I was in university, and I know its gotten worse. Do you know the long-term impacts of that, of hookup culture?
Okay, do you know anything about how hookup culturebecause I know a lot of, especially Gen Zs, because its gotten worseit was already bad enough when I was in university, and I know its gotten worse. Do you know the long-term impacts of that, of hookup culture?
Rob Henderson:I think my sense is that its actually declining.
I think my sense is that its actually declining.
Mikhaila:Okay. Thats my sense too. But is it possible thatI mean, you know the statisticsbut is it possible that were just in an echo chamber of hope?
Okay. Thats my sense too. But is it possible thatI mean, you know the statisticsbut is it possible that were just in an echo chamber of hope?
Rob Henderson:You and I are both millennials, and I remember 10, 15 years ago, people would hang out, right? Like, "Do you want to hang out? Do you want to go to this thing?" and just go for hang outs or whatever. And then the hangout would turn into a hookup. Im noticing more and more Zoomers will refer totheyll talk about dates. Like, theyll actually say, "I went on a date," or "Im going to go on a date. And this seems to actually be coming back a little bit. Again, just sort of observational, anecdotal, but I remember there was this reluctancelike, calling something a date felt weird or awkward or icky or something 15 years ago. Now you go on a date. Now, all that being said, it does seem like a lot more young people just arent doing anything, like theyre just not having sex at all. And youve probably seen some of these stats, like the sex recession and this kind of stuff. So, you know, something weird, I think, is happening where some people, I think, are trying to revive some version of monogamous dating, and others are just sort of checking out altogether. And theres always going to be a very small percentage of the population that would score high on, you know, what psychologists call sociosexual orientation, which basically is just how promiscuous you are. And theres like 10% of the population that is extremely high on this trait for both men and women, and most of the promiscuity actually takes place among that group. And everyone else sort of mistakenly believes that thats happening everywhere, but its really just that 10% of the population hooking up with each other.
You and I are both millennials, and I remember 10, 15 years ago, people would hang out, right? Like, "Do you want to hang out? Do you want to go to this thing?" and just go for hang outs or whatever. And then the hangout would turn into a hookup. Im noticing more and more Zoomers will refer totheyll talk about dates. Like, theyll actually say, "I went on a date," or "Im going to go on a date. And this seems to actually be coming back a little bit. Again, just sort of observational, anecdotal, but I remember there was this reluctancelike, calling something a date felt weird or awkward or icky or something 15 years ago. Now you go on a date. Now, all that being said, it does seem like a lot more young people just arent doing anything, like theyre just not having sex at all. And youve probably seen some of these stats, like the sex recession and this kind of stuff. So, you know, something weird, I think, is happening where some people, I think, are trying to revive some version of monogamous dating, and others are just sort of checking out altogether. And theres always going to be a very small percentage of the population that would score high on, you know, what psychologists call sociosexual orientation, which basically is just how promiscuous you are. And theres like 10% of the population that is extremely high on this trait for both men and women, and most of the promiscuity actually takes place among that group. And everyone else sort of mistakenly believes that thats happening everywhere, but its really just that 10% of the population hooking up with each other.
Mikhaila:That makes sense.
That makes sense.
Rob Henderson:So, yeah, the hookup thingit seems to be waning a little bit. I know more young people seem to be abandoning the apps. A lot of them are frustrated with them, but I think a lot of them are just having trouble because theres not a lot of alternatives either.
So, yeah, the hookup thingit seems to be waning a little bit. I know more young people seem to be abandoning the apps. A lot of them are frustrated with them, but I think a lot of them are just having trouble because theres not a lot of alternatives either.
Mikhaila:Yeah, I know. Ive been trying to think about what the alternative is. I guess people figured out that the apps didnt really work.
Yeah, I know. Ive been trying to think about what the alternative is. I guess people figured out that the apps didnt really work.
Rob Henderson:Yeah.
Yeah.
Mikhaila:A lot of childless women started experiencing unhappiness and telling people about it. I remember growing up, and I was definitely toldand I dont think people are told this anymorebut I was definitely told you could have kids until you were like, I dont know, 45. It wasI think that was before these women who didnt have kids reached that age and then realized they couldnt, and then told everybody else about it.
A lot of childless women started experiencing unhappiness and telling people about it. I remember growing up, and I was definitely toldand I dont think people are told this anymorebut I was definitely told you could have kids until you were like, I dont know, 45. It wasI think that was before these women who didnt have kids reached that age and then realized they couldnt, and then told everybody else about it.
Rob Henderson:Right.
Right.
Mikhaila:So, I feel like the lies kind of unfolded. I think celebrities are talking about how, "Oh, I was one of those people that was told I could have kids when I was 45, and I cant." So maybe thats part of the reason its going away, because people are realizing its a lie.
So, I feel like the lies kind of unfolded. I think celebrities are talking about how, "Oh, I was one of those people that was told I could have kids when I was 45, and I cant." So maybe thats part of the reason its going away, because people are realizing its a lie.
Rob Henderson:If you go back and read articles in places likeThe Atlanticin 2010, it was like, "Hookup culture is great for women, hookup culture is great for everyone, we all win. Why do we need to be so committed to this old, outdated model of relationships?" And so I just wrote this post on my Substack about how people believe that we have evolved sort of beyond arranged matchmaking. And the argument I made in this essay was that universities are essentially like the new matchmaking systems. They basically sort people. Okay, so I gave this thought experiment in the essay where I said, you know, imagine theres an upper-middle-class older married couple. They have an 18-year-old kid, and they want to identify suitable partners. And so, they ask potential suitors, "Okay, we want you to tell usto take an IQ test and tell us your score. We want you to go out and gather recommendation letters. We want you to write a personal statement about your background and your values. We want you to give us the financial statement of your parents so that we know how much money they make," so on and so forth. And now you have a pool of all this information, and now, you know, okay, you can put your kid with these other young people based on this information, and then from there, they can kind of figure it out. And thats basically what college is. Most people dont actually meet their spouse in college or university, but by going to a place like that, you become a part of this strata of society where you go to college, then you go into this kind of white-collar job where almost everyone around you and everyone you ever interact with has a college degree, and you enter this kind of refined dating pool over time. And then if you go on to grad school, this continues to occur. So theres this stat that I share where if your highest level of education is a high school diploma, your likelihood of marrying someone with a college degree is only 9%. But if you have a college degree, your likelihood of marrying someone with a college degree is 65%. And that study was done in 2005. My guess is its even higher now. Social scientists call this assortative mating, where people tend to pair with individuals who are similar to themselves along educational lines, but also political lines and personality and so on. So, yeah, I think a lot of young peopleactually, no one tells them this, right? Like, everyone thinks, "Oh, college is to get a degree, college is to study, college is to prepare for my career." But youre also in this unique environment that will never be replicated again, where youre literally around tons of other young people the same age as you, roughly the same academic level, same interests, all these things. And a lot of young people will tell methey graduate college, go into the workforce, and theyre shocked at how their dating pool has dramatically shrunk. Because now youre at work, youre in an organization where, like, you have older bosses. Most of the time, everyones older than you when youre fresh out of college and you have your first job. And youre not around lots of interesting young people, potential partners. So toward the end, I suggest, if youre a young person reading this, think harder about that. Think harder about, when youre in college, finding someone more serious in that kind of environment.
If you go back and read articles in places like
in 2010, it was like, "Hookup culture is great for women, hookup culture is great for everyone, we all win. Why do we need to be so committed to this old, outdated model of relationships?" And so I just wrote this post on my Substack about how people believe that we have evolved sort of beyond arranged matchmaking. And the argument I made in this essay was that universities are essentially like the new matchmaking systems. They basically sort people. Okay, so I gave this thought experiment in the essay where I said, you know, imagine theres an upper-middle-class older married couple. They have an 18-year-old kid, and they want to identify suitable partners. And so, they ask potential suitors, "Okay, we want you to tell usto take an IQ test and tell us your score. We want you to go out and gather recommendation letters. We want you to write a personal statement about your background and your values. We want you to give us the financial statement of your parents so that we know how much money they make," so on and so forth. And now you have a pool of all this information, and now, you know, okay, you can put your kid with these other young people based on this information, and then from there, they can kind of figure it out. And thats basically what college is. Most people dont actually meet their spouse in college or university, but by going to a place like that, you become a part of this strata of society where you go to college, then you go into this kind of white-collar job where almost everyone around you and everyone you ever interact with has a college degree, and you enter this kind of refined dating pool over time. And then if you go on to grad school, this continues to occur. So theres this stat that I share where if your highest level of education is a high school diploma, your likelihood of marrying someone with a college degree is only 9%. But if you have a college degree, your likelihood of marrying someone with a college degree is 65%. And that study was done in 2005. My guess is its even higher now. Social scientists call this assortative mating, where people tend to pair with individuals who are similar to themselves along educational lines, but also political lines and personality and so on. So, yeah, I think a lot of young peopleactually, no one tells them this, right? Like, everyone thinks, "Oh, college is to get a degree, college is to study, college is to prepare for my career." But youre also in this unique environment that will never be replicated again, where youre literally around tons of other young people the same age as you, roughly the same academic level, same interests, all these things. And a lot of young people will tell methey graduate college, go into the workforce, and theyre shocked at how their dating pool has dramatically shrunk. Because now youre at work, youre in an organization where, like, you have older bosses. Most of the time, everyones older than you when youre fresh out of college and you have your first job. And youre not around lots of interesting young people, potential partners. So toward the end, I suggest, if youre a young person reading this, think harder about that. Think harder about, when youre in college, finding someone more serious in that kind of environment.
Mikhaila:Thats smart. Yeah, I never understood the value of privateI went to a public school, and it was a mess. I went to a whole bunch of different public schools, and they were all messes. And I didntI kind of had this negative view about private school, like, why would anyone pay that much money to put their kid in private school? And then I grew up and went to university, and I met a couple of people that had been in private school, and I realized that their friends were different than my friends in public school. And I was like, "Oh, I get it." Like, maybe part of the reason parents put their kids in private school is so theyre surrounded by these other kids that are from richer families, that have these different experiences. I had never thought about that as a kid. I was just like, "Why would you spend that much money on a school? What does that matter?" But it isthat social group is so important. I didnt think about that with university because usually, Im like, "Its a bad idea. Its not going to get you a job."
Thats smart. Yeah, I never understood the value of privateI went to a public school, and it was a mess. I went to a whole bunch of different public schools, and they were all messes. And I didntI kind of had this negative view about private school, like, why would anyone pay that much money to put their kid in private school? And then I grew up and went to university, and I met a couple of people that had been in private school, and I realized that their friends were different than my friends in public school. And I was like, "Oh, I get it." Like, maybe part of the reason parents put their kids in private school is so theyre surrounded by these other kids that are from richer families, that have these different experiences. I had never thought about that as a kid. I was just like, "Why would you spend that much money on a school? What does that matter?" But it isthat social group is so important. I didnt think about that with university because usually, Im like, "Its a bad idea. Its not going to get you a job."
Rob Henderson:Youre paying yourself or for your kid to be around more attractive people who will basically give rise to healthy grandchildren, form long-term relationships, put them in a situation where the grandkids can be successful, that kind of thing. So, I think there is something to that. I dont know if parents consciously have that thought, but probably some of them do.
Youre paying yourself or for your kid to be around more attractive people who will basically give rise to healthy grandchildren, form long-term relationships, put them in a situation where the grandkids can be successful, that kind of thing. So, I think there is something to that. I dont know if parents consciously have that thought, but probably some of them do.
Mikhaila:Yeah, I think people who put their kids in private schools do. I dont know. Thats what Ive thought, anyway. My daughters in a private school now, and now that I can afford it, Im like, I get it. The kids here are different than the kids in public school. Ive seen that. Sneaky. Okay, I can get behind that. Well, Rob, thank you for coming on.
Yeah, I think people who put their kids in private schools do. I dont know. Thats what Ive thought, anyway. My daughters in a private school now, and now that I can afford it, Im like, I get it. The kids here are different than the kids in public school. Ive seen that. Sneaky. Okay, I can get behind that. Well, Rob, thank you for coming on.
Rob Henderson:Thanks, Mikhaila.
Thanks, Mikhaila.
Comments
Restacks
Penny Adrian
Penny Adrian
Pennys Substack
Pennys Substack
Pennys Substack
Aug 24
You wrote: "...to successfully hunt large animals and be successful in warfare with other groups, the males in a group had to cooperate with one another. If one man monopolizes the women, the other males would gang up and kill him. Other primates arent capable of that kind of advanced cooperation, of planned conspiratorial killing of bullies and selfish males."
You wrote: "...to successfully hunt large animals and be successful in warfare with other groups, the males in a group had to cooperate with one another. If one man monopolizes the women, the other males would gang up and kill him. Other primates arent capable of that kind of advanced cooperation, of planned conspiratorial killing of bullies and selfish males."
One thing you neglected to mention is that human females are the only female primates who love their mates. This gives rise to sexual jealousy.
One thing you neglected to mention is that human females are the only female primates who love their mates. This gives rise to sexual jealousy.
Female humans, like human males, also relied on cooperation to survive - perhaps even more so than males.
Female humans, like human males, also relied on cooperation to survive - perhaps even more so than males.
If a group of female humans were expected to cooperate on gathering food and caring for children, they'd best not secretly want to kill each other (or each other's children) out of jealousy.
If a group of female humans were expected to cooperate on gathering food and caring for children, they'd best not secretly want to kill each other (or each other's children) out of jealousy.
Women in polygamous societies seem to have much weaker emotional ties to their husbands than women in monogamous societies.
Women in polygamous societies seem to have much weaker emotional ties to their husbands than women in monogamous societies.
Like (3)
Reply
Share
Lynn Edwards
Lynn Edwards
Lynn Edwards
Lynn Edwards
Lynn Edwards
Aug 24
We went private for high school after trying public.. We are zoned to a highly ranked public school, but the public high schools are now an average of 2500 kids. We didn't find any difference in the quality of the students (the highly rated public was more first generation, but I imagine of lowest level global elites). We didn't find particularly better or worse teachers at either school. What we happily paid for at private was for small class sizes where the teachers all know my kids names (and a little about them). It's quite sad that it costs so much to have teachers know who my kids are, but if a parent has the money for this, it's instinctually hard not to prioritise this. Tuition is quite expensive enough that I wish they would make public schools smaller, but I unfortunately don't see that happening.
We went private for high school after trying public.. We are zoned to a highly ranked public school, but the public high schools are now an average of 2500 kids. We didn't find any difference in the quality of the students (the highly rated public was more first generation, but I imagine of lowest level global elites). We didn't find particularly better or worse teachers at either school. What we happily paid for at private was for small class sizes where the teachers all know my kids names (and a little about them). It's quite sad that it costs so much to have teachers know who my kids are, but if a parent has the money for this, it's instinctually hard not to prioritise this. Tuition is quite expensive enough that I wish they would make public schools smaller, but I unfortunately don't see that happening.
To your discussion on different types of students I asked my ADHD kid how she found private high school and she said it wasn't harder than public middle because of the class sizes and attention from teachers. So I imagine you can create a positive cycle, if you have one system where the ADHD kids can pay attention and don't disrupt. That's just the example most relative for me.
To your discussion on different types of students I asked my ADHD kid how she found private high school and she said it wasn't harder than public middle because of the class sizes and attention from teachers. So I imagine you can create a positive cycle, if you have one system where the ADHD kids can pay attention and don't disrupt. That's just the example most relative for me.
Like (1)
Reply
Share
Top
Latest
Discussions

Rob Henderson

Rob Henderson

Rob Henderson

Rob Henderson

Rob Henderson

Rob Henderson

Rob Henderson

Rob Henderson

Rob Henderson

Rob Henderson


undefined subscriptions will be displayed on your profile (edit)
Skip for now
For your security, we need to re-authenticate you.
Click the link we sent to sasha.p.podolsky@gmail.com, orclick here to sign in.