

1
Book meeting
Book a meeting
Subscribed
Share
Share
Give a gift subscription
Give a gift subscription

Below are my highlights, notes, and reactions to the eighth installment of Jordanscourseon personality psychology titled Conscientiousness: Industriousness & Orderliness.
Below are my highlights, notes, and reactions to the eighth installment of Jordans
on personality psychology titled Conscientiousness: Industriousness & Orderliness.
Links for my notes on thefirst,second,third,fourth,fifth,sixth, andseventhlectures.
Links for my notes on the
,
,
,
,
,
, and
lectures.
[In square brackets are thoughts/notes I jotted while listening]:
Openness to Experience, like the other Big Five traits, has two different aspects: Intellect & Openness.
Features of Openness to Experience: Original (versus conventional), imaginative (vs. down to earth), creative (vs. uncreative), broad interest (vs. narrow interest), complex (vs. simple), curious (vs. incurious), daring (vs. cautious), independent (vs. dependent), untraditional (vs. traditional), liberal (vs. conservative).
People who are high on the aspect of openness: Enjoy the beauty of nature, believe in the importance of art, love to reflect on things, get deeply immersed in music, like poetry, notice the emotional aspects of paintings and pictures, need a creative outlet, get lost in thought, often daydream, see beauty in things that others might not notice.
Openness is used both for the overall trait and for this particular aspect because it is difficult to find more than one word that captures the idea of openness better than the term openness itself.
People high on the aspect of intellect: Are quick to understand things, dont have difficulty in understanding abstract ideas, can handle a lot of information, like to solve complex problems, seek philosophical discussions, seek difficult reading material, have a rich vocabulary, think quickly, learn things quickly, formulate clear ideas.
Intellect is the personality reflection of intelligence. A person high on intellect is interested in ideas and is fluent in discussing ideas. Even if you dont know a persons IQ score, if you get the sense that the person is smart, he or she is likely high on the intellect aspect of Openness to Experience.
The openness aspect captures creativity, imagination, and interest in aesthetics. They tend to be interested in art and literature and music and dance.
[Openness, like other traits, is associated with costs as well as benefits. For instance, people higher in openness tend toexperiencegreater difficulties in their sex lives, their sleeping and eating habits, and their finances.]
[Openness, like other traits, is associated with costs as well as benefits. For instance, people higher in openness tend to
greater difficulties in their sex lives, their sleeping and eating habits, and their finances.]
[People high on Opennesstendto have fewer children.]
[People high on Openness
to have fewer children.]
Jordan criticizes the idea, promulgated by many psychologists, that everyone is creative. That is absolutely wrong.
Creativity is the ability to generate a diverse range of original but practical ideas.
One method psychologists use to test creativity is divergent thinking tasks. One example is to have someone write down as many uses as they can for a brick. Or write down as many white edible objects as they can think of in a limited amount of time.
There are different ways of scoring these tasks. One way is to just add up the total number of ideas. Another is to measure originality, or how many different answers a participant produced that no one else in the study did.
These creativity tasks correlate with Openness to Experience.
[Listening to Jordan describe these divergent thinking tasks, Im reminded of something from years ago when I was in the Air Force. A tech guy visited our work center and had a bunch of equipment he had to plug in. There were no nearby outlets. The supervisor and my coworkers tried to figure out a solution. As my colleagues and supervisor debated possible solutions, they decided to send a runner to get an extension cord and power strip. It then occurred to me that our laptop lockers, which had been relegated to the background for months, housed charging outlets within them. I promptly opened the drawers, disconnected the laptops, and presented the tech guy with ready outlets. Essentially, people had grown so accustomed to the laptop lockers that they had become a part of the background scenery; no one considered that they contained outlets within each of the drawers. Why did I notice this? Probably because Im weird, or, more generously, creative/divergent.]
Jordan and his colleagues developed a creative achievement questionnaire.
The majority of creative output is produced by a very small number of people. A pareto distribution.
Of the people who produce lots of creative work, only a small percentage of their work captures peoples attention and interest. Picasso produced thousands of paintings, Bach composed countless pieces of music. But the vast majority of educated people are familiar with only a small fraction of their output.
[Consistency is an underrated force in determining success. Ive been writing a weekly newsletter now for nearly 4 years, with almost no interruption. Even if Im not feeling particularly inspired, I still force myself to write something down each week. Not every post is a smash hit; some are duds. But if you write 52 posts throughout the course of a year, theres a stronger chance of growing a readership and receiving interest than if you write, say, 5 or 10.]
[So often I see promising young writers who post 3 or 4 quality essays, and then stop updating. Their Substacks or websites just go completely cold. Ive spoken with some of them and they say they only want to write when they have a good idea, or theyre worried that if their idea isnt good enough theyll look foolish if they post it, or something along those lines. But in most cases, if you are just starting out as a writer online, you have to be prolific to break through.]
Jordan mentions Prices Law: in any organization or field, roughly 50% of the value is produced by the square root of the total number of individuals.
[Interestingly, this seems to apply for organizations as well. For instance, the top 20 universities in the U.S. are responsible for producing something like half of new faculty hires across the U.S. colleges.]
Jordan describes his experiences witnessing large companies fail. Imagine a large company of 10,000 people, and (based on Prices Law), 100 of them are responsible for producing half of the profits. The company has a bad quarter and announces that they are going to lay off employees. Who will be among the first to voluntarily leave in search of a better job? Almost certainly a disproportionate number among those 100. As the company loses its most promising employees, the company enters a downward spiral.
[Perhaps Im flattering myself, but I like to believe I saw something like this happening in academia and exited at the right moment, and started a Substack at the right moment just as the platform began to rise in prominence.]
Marx was correct that capital tends to accrue in the hands of a smaller and smaller number of people.
But what Marx missed is that there is a lot of churn, with people entering and exiting different socioeconomic categories throughout their lives.
[Atsomepoint between the ages of 25 and 60:
[At
point between the ages of 25 and 60:
73% of Americans will find themselves in the top 20 percent of the income distribution
56% will enter the top 10%
39% will enter top 5%
12% will enter in the top 1%]
[Among people with a net worth of $30 million or more, 67.7%areself-made, 23.7% have a combination of inherited and self-created wealth, and only 8.5% have completely inherited their wealth.]
[Among people with a net worth of $30 million or more, 67.7%
self-made, 23.7% have a combination of inherited and self-created wealth, and only 8.5% have completely inherited their wealth.]
[People quibble about what self-made means. My (imperfect) heuristic: The likelihood of someone in a similar situation, with similar means, achieving a comparable level of success. Lots of smart upper-middle-class young people study at Harvard and try to launch a startup, almost none of them reach Zuckerbergs success. Many athletic young people play high school and college basketball, almost none of them attain Michael Jordans superstardom.]
[Fortune 500 companies have a lifespan of about 30 years.]
[Prices Law implies that as a company grows, incompetence increases exponentially while competence grows linearly.]
IQ correlates with both the openness and intellect aspects of Openness to Experience.
People high on Openness to Experience are motivated by ideas for their own sake. And aesthetic experience for its own sake.
People high on this trait are interested in broader, more abstract, ideas, people low on this trait tend to be more practical and concrete.
Both types of people are valuable; those focused on the big picture as well as those who are more down to earth.
Most people with a high IQ are interested in ideas and tend to score highly on the intellect aspect of Openness to Experience.
Jordan points out that the majority of college-educated people spend most of their time with individuals with at least 100 IQ (average intelligence), and have no idea what its like to be someone in the bottom half of the intelligence distribution.
[Generally, people have difficulty imagining what mental life and everyday existence is like for someone whose IQ is more than 10 or 15 points away from their own. This is especially true for people who have only ever spent time around similar individuals. Ironically, highly intelligent people are one of the groups most susceptible to this blind spot in their thinking. I grew up around people with average or below average intelligence. Sure, they had some difficulty with getting through Algebra II or explaining the motifs of the required reading. But overall, they were just as capable of everyday problem solving, responsibility, and good moral character as anyone else.]
[Most people are capable of living decent and good lives. But very smart people (usually on the right) overvalue the importance of intelligence by saying people with low intelligence are resigned to a dull and meaningless life. And other smart people (usually on the left) say intelligence doesnt exist and that with enough material resources, anyone can master difficult college-level coursework. Both of them are wrong. I wrote about thishere.]
[Most people are capable of living decent and good lives. But very smart people (usually on the right) overvalue the importance of intelligence by saying people with low intelligence are resigned to a dull and meaningless life. And other smart people (usually on the left) say intelligence doesnt exist and that with enough material resources, anyone can master difficult college-level coursework. Both of them are wrong. I wrote about this
.]
[Though I will say that so much of modern life is needlessly complex, which imposes a tax of sorts on less intelligent people. A few years ago, I had to navigate a complex payment system to receive compensation from the New York Post. Grew irritated when I considered that a less adept person would have incredible difficulty just to get paid. Interestingly, the NYT had a much easier payment system.]
Anexamplefrom the psychologist and intelligence researcher Linda Gottfredson on how acknowledging IQ can benefit people:
An
from the psychologist and intelligence researcher Linda Gottfredson on how acknowledging IQ can benefit people:
Jordan derides very smart people who say that anyone can do anything if they work hard enough.
[Im well aware that my close friends in high school, no matter how hard they worked, were never going to study at a fancy college. I discuss this at length in the final third ofmy forthcoming book. In short, they werent college material. And thats fine. They werent going to go to Yale; that was not going to change no matter how they were raised or where they grew up. Two of them, though, went to prison.And that could have changed had their families been different and had they been taught different values and priorities. Not only by their parents and caregivers, but by society at large. Overall, we dont really know how to raise the ceiling in terms of outcomes for kids in poor and dysfunctional environments. But we can raise the floor.]
[Im well aware that my close friends in high school, no matter how hard they worked, were never going to study at a fancy college. I discuss this at length in the final third of
. In short, they werent college material. And thats fine. They werent going to go to Yale; that was not going to change no matter how they were raised or where they grew up. Two of them, though, went to prison.
. Not only by their parents and caregivers, but by society at large. Overall, we dont really know how to raise the ceiling in terms of outcomes for kids in poor and dysfunctional environments. But we can raise the floor.]
There are two forms of intelligence: fluid intelligence and crystallized intelligence.
Fluid intelligence is how fast you can compute and learn new information; crystallized intelligence is how much knowledge you have stored and how well you can apply it
Fluid intelligence declines with age; crystallized intelligence increases with age
Formal education increases crystallized intelligence
Besides basic nutrition and care, all attempts to raise fluid intelligence have been met with virtually zero success
Proper care and nutrition enables people to reach the limits of their mental abilities, but other methods dont seem to work
If you are in a developed western country and want to maximize your income by the age of 40, youd be better off being born at the 95thpercentile of IQ than the 95thpercentile of family income. In other words, IQ is a stronger predictor of future income than family wealth.
If you are in a developed western country and want to maximize your income by the age of 40, youd be better off being born at the 95
percentile of IQ than the 95
percentile of family income. In other words, IQ is a stronger predictor of future income than family wealth.
[Onestudyof 1,074 sibling pairs found that IQ was just about as predictive for future socioeconomic outcomes within families as it is for people selected at random in the U.S. population.]
[One
of 1,074 sibling pairs found that IQ was just about as predictive for future socioeconomic outcomes within families as it is for people selected at random in the U.S. population.]
Jordan points out the flaw in the argument that we live in an unfair and oppressive society. The best predictors of success in life are IQ and Conscientiousness. Smart and hardworking people are the most likely to get ahead in western countries. This is exactly the kind of society you want.
[A society where getting ahead entails something other than how smart you are or how hard you work isnot a society you want to live in.]
[A society where getting ahead entails something other than how smart you are or how hard you work is
.]
[This is obvious when you look at the number of immigrants who flee to the U.S. or other western countries. The other day I was at my sisters wedding. At the end of the dinner, I went to the kitchen to see if the cooks had any cigarettes. As we smoked Black & Milds together, the head caterer, a Filipino guy, explained to me, I tell all my workers the same thing. If you work hard in this country you can make money. Its that simple. Its kind of like that in the Philippines too, but not like how it is here. America is amazing. That conversation did more to lift my optimism for the future of the country than anything else this year.]
The wealthier and more egalitarian the society, the more heritable IQ is
[Essentially, once a society reaches a certain level of material abundance, environmental inputs are less varied. Thus, genes account for more of the differences between individuals.]
When people in a given society receive food and schooling, the mean IQ of the country increases. But the differences between individuals remains the same.
[To vastly over-simplify, imagine you and I live in a poor country. Your IQ is 100 and mine is 90. Then we receive regular nutritious meals and attend a newly built school. Your IQ jumps to 110 and mine increases to 100. We both got smarter, the overall IQ of the country increases, but the gaps between us remain the same.]
[Jordan understandably focuses on material factors and education. This is what most intelligence researchers concentrate on when studying how to raise IQ. I havent yet seen any research on the effects of severe childhood instability. I took an IQ test when I was 7 and scored below average overall, with something like 82 on the verbal section, almost certainly due to my frequent relocations in the foster system.]
[As a society, we are eager to feed poor kids and make sure they go to school, but no one seems interested in promoting norms and behaviors that reduce disorder in their home lives.]
People with high Conscientiousness but low intelligence would suffer under a system that supplied a Universal Basic Income
People high in Conscientiousness want to work hard and want to feel useful. Without work and a sense of purpose, they often feel a deep sense of depression.
Jordan suggests that as society becomes more complex, it will become more difficult to find a place for people with low intelligence where they feel purposeful and satisfied
[For people who are at the very low end of intelligence, this might be true. But overall, things seem to be moving in the opposite direction. For example, thus far, technology seems more likely to supplant white-collar workers than blue-collar ones. Im not sure anyone predicted that a technology that could pass the Turing Test (e.g., latest update of Chat GPT and other large language models) would arrive before the widespread adoption of self-driving cars. It seems that machines are more likely to replace physicians (diagnosing illnesses and charting treatment recommendations) than nurses (supplying actual physical patient care).]
Jordan describes the results of the studies hes administered with his colleagues measuring creative achievement, and most people score zero.
A tiny proportion of people score very high on this creative achievement measure. A small minority of people are creative in a way that receives attention from other people.
This Pareto phenomenon shows up everywhere. A small number of cities contain a disproportionate number of people. A small number of stars in the galaxy have most of the mass. At the elite level of sports, a disproportionate number of goals are scored by a small number of athletes; most championships are won by a small number of people. Money follows this pattern as well, of course.
[Otherillustrationsof the Pareto pattern: 20% of people account for 80% of healthcare costs, 3% of Americans own half the guns in the U.S., 25% of twitter users account for 97% of the tweets, 30% of drivers account for 60% of serious traffic collisions.]
[Other
of the Pareto pattern: 20% of people account for 80% of healthcare costs, 3% of Americans own half the guns in the U.S., 25% of twitter users account for 97% of the tweets, 30% of drivers account for 60% of serious traffic collisions.]
In the economic and creative realm, success breeds success, and failure breeds failure. As you start to attain accomplishments, people will want to be around you, opportunities open up, which leads to more success.
[A simple example: You step out of a beater car from the 1980s that couldnt pass a smog test versus a brand new Bugatti. When people see you in the former example, they wont want to be around you. Life isnt going well, and now you find it difficult to make social contacts. But in the second example, people will be drawn to you. Youre already probably successful (you drive a Bugatti), and now you have more social capital.]
[Depending on the circumstances, though, there are ways to inhibit a downward spiral. In our increasingly casual culture, something as simple as dressing well (not especially difficult with discount stores, outlets, and secondhand shops) can help you to move into a positive feedback cycle.]
Even if we flatten the income distribution, we can never flatten peoples talents, personalities, propensities, and level of motivation. If you redistributed wealth today, disparities would inevitably emerge once again.
[A thought experiment from the political philosopher Robert Nozick: Assume the distribution of money in a society is completely egalitarian. In this society, Wilt Chamberlain is an excellent basketball player. Many teams compete with each other to get him on their team. Chamberlain eventually agrees to play for a certain team on the condition that everyone who attends a game in which he plays gives him 25 cents. During the season, 1 million fans attend the games. Chamberlain receives $250,000. Now he has $250,000 more than anyone else. Is this new distribution unjust?]
If we want smart and capable and creative people to solve problems and create art and do interesting things, they have to be compensated and this usually leads to them out-earning most other people. Under a conventional communist framework in which everyone is paid the same and anyone who attempts to display their talent is viewed with suspicion, there is no incentive to be productive.
Jordan concludes this lecture series by saying that the core message is that it is important to understand that people differ from one another. It is useful to know exactly how these differences manifest themselves. This helps us to better understand ourselves, improve our relationships with others, and become more productive members of society.
To receive new posts, access more than100 premium archived posts, and support my work, consider becoming a free or paid subscriber.
Subscribed
Comments
Restacks
Grape Soda
Grape Soda
Grape Soda
Grape Soda
Grape Soda
Nov 20, 2023
Always useful and informative. Thanks!
Always useful and informative. Thanks!
Like (1)
Reply
Share
Dan Hochberg
Dan Hochberg
Oct 31, 2023
[As a society, we are eager to feed poor kids and make sure they go to school, but no one seems interested in promoting norms and behaviors that reduce disorder in their home lives.]
[As a society, we are eager to feed poor kids and make sure they go to school, but no one seems interested in promoting norms and behaviors that reduce disorder in their home lives.]
This is so true.  One reason I like the idea of charter schools is that the better ones can do some of the character formation that is lacking in some disadvantaged kids' home lives.
This is so true.  One reason I like the idea of charter schools is that the better ones can do some of the character formation that is lacking in some disadvantaged kids' home lives.
Like (4)
Reply
Share
Top
Latest
Discussions

Rob Henderson

Rob Henderson

Rob Henderson

Rob Henderson

Rob Henderson

Rob Henderson

Rob Henderson

Rob Henderson

Rob Henderson

Rob Henderson


undefined subscriptions will be displayed on your profile (edit)
Skip for now
For your security, we need to re-authenticate you.
Click the link we sent to sasha.p.podolsky@gmail.com, orclick here to sign in.