

1
Book meeting
Book a meeting
Subscribed
Share
Share
Give a gift subscription
Give a gift subscription
Here is the transcript, lightly edited, with highlights from my conversation withYuri Bezmenovon hisStruggle Sessionspodcast. Enjoy:
Here is the transcript, lightly edited, with highlights from my conversation with
on his
podcast. Enjoy:
Yuri Bezmenov: Comrades, welcome to Struggle Sessions. I'm your host, Yuri Bezmenov. Today, I'm honored to have Rob Henderson on the show. Rob is the author of the bookTroubled, which was his memoir, and in my opinion, one of the most unique voices out in America today. So Rob, thank you for taking the time to join.
: Comrades, welcome to Struggle Sessions. I'm your host, Yuri Bezmenov. Today, I'm honored to have Rob Henderson on the show. Rob is the author of the book
, which was his memoir, and in my opinion, one of the most unique voices out in America today. So Rob, thank you for taking the time to join.
Dr. Rob Henderson: Hey, thanks for inviting me. I liked yourrecent pieceinAmerican Mind. Great to speak with you.
: Hey, thanks for inviting me. I liked your
in
. Great to speak with you.
Yuri Bezmenov: You're too kind. One thing that really jumps out at me about your life story is how you've lived in so many different places. Early on, obviously, it wasn't by choice, but you've gone into the Air Force all over the country and the world. You've gone to New Haven at Yale. You then went back across the pond to Cambridge. So what are the things you do to adapt when you're moving around as much as you have?
: You're too kind. One thing that really jumps out at me about your life story is how you've lived in so many different places. Early on, obviously, it wasn't by choice, but you've gone into the Air Force all over the country and the world. You've gone to New Haven at Yale. You then went back across the pond to Cambridge. So what are the things you do to adapt when you're moving around as much as you have?
Dr. Rob Henderson: Speaking with unfamiliar people in a new environment, that's something that I learned to do pretty early. I moved around a lot as a kid. In my bookTroubled, I talk about growing up in the foster homes in LA and bouncing around a lot from different families and making friends with kids and just being observant. Later in the military, I learned to pay close attention to my surroundings. I've always been a curious and observant guy. I've always been a big reader, too. If you're about to enter a new environment, chances are someone else has been through a similar situation and has written about their own experiences. So it's helpful to read essays or books about other people's observations and accounts. Speaking, communicating, and learning from others has been really helpful for me.
: Speaking with unfamiliar people in a new environment, that's something that I learned to do pretty early. I moved around a lot as a kid. In my book
, I talk about growing up in the foster homes in LA and bouncing around a lot from different families and making friends with kids and just being observant. Later in the military, I learned to pay close attention to my surroundings. I've always been a curious and observant guy. I've always been a big reader, too. If you're about to enter a new environment, chances are someone else has been through a similar situation and has written about their own experiences. So it's helpful to read essays or books about other people's observations and accounts. Speaking, communicating, and learning from others has been really helpful for me.
Yuri Bezmenov: Which books do you think really stuck with you over the years, especially as it relates to someone who's moved around a lot and tried to fit into new surroundings?
: Which books do you think really stuck with you over the years, especially as it relates to someone who's moved around a lot and tried to fit into new surroundings?
Dr. Rob Henderson: This can be traced through my early childhood all the way up through roughly the present. So I grew up in foster homes and then I enlisted when I was 17. And then at 25, I went off to Yale on the GI Bill before going off to get a PhD at Cambridge. And that transition from the military to Yale was, I knew that was probably going to be the biggest kind of transition of my life, at least in my adult life. And so I read this book,I Am Charlotte Simmonsby Tom Wolfe. At this point, he's kind of an iconic American author. He wroteThe Right Stuff,A Man in Full,Bonfire of the Vanities, and so many other American classics.I Am Charlotte Simmonswas one of his lesser-known books, and apparently, it was critically panned, but I thought it was an astute satire of life on an elite residential college campus. It's about this young woman who's from the sticks, I can't remember exactly where, Virginia or South Carolina or something, and she goes off to DuPont University, which is a fictional university that's supposed to be something akin to an amalgamation of Harvard and Duke. And she is shocked at the social attitudes and the hookup culture and the reckless drug use and the kinds of people she encounters. So I read that book and that was really helpful for me, knowing what to expect. It was a satire, but it was pretty on the nose. And then, you know, when I was a little kid, I read maybe some of these books are familiar to your listeners, you know, kind of millennial, elder millennials, theBoxcar Children.
: This can be traced through my early childhood all the way up through roughly the present. So I grew up in foster homes and then I enlisted when I was 17. And then at 25, I went off to Yale on the GI Bill before going off to get a PhD at Cambridge. And that transition from the military to Yale was, I knew that was probably going to be the biggest kind of transition of my life, at least in my adult life. And so I read this book,
by Tom Wolfe. At this point, he's kind of an iconic American author. He wrote
,
,
, and so many other American classics.
was one of his lesser-known books, and apparently, it was critically panned, but I thought it was an astute satire of life on an elite residential college campus. It's about this young woman who's from the sticks, I can't remember exactly where, Virginia or South Carolina or something, and she goes off to DuPont University, which is a fictional university that's supposed to be something akin to an amalgamation of Harvard and Duke. And she is shocked at the social attitudes and the hookup culture and the reckless drug use and the kinds of people she encounters. So I read that book and that was really helpful for me, knowing what to expect. It was a satire, but it was pretty on the nose. And then, you know, when I was a little kid, I read maybe some of these books are familiar to your listeners, you know, kind of millennial, elder millennials, the
.
Yuri Bezmenov: Yeah, that's a great series.
: Yeah, that's a great series.
Dr. Rob Henderson: You can draw inspiration from it. You have these kids who are essentially homeless. I mean, I don't remember the timeline it's set in, but they're trying to make their way and struggle through and find work. It has this feeling of like a Depression era in terms of chronology. Military memoirs are great. I mean, a recent one that got a lot of attention was David Goggins' book,Can't Hurt Me. I read that book after I'd already gotten into grad school, but he does a good job of outlining what it can be like to be someone who is aimless and adrift and continually engaging in self-defeating behaviors and then finding some inspiration through military structure. And so that's a good one, too. And one that's coming out soon that I'm excited about is Ed LatimoresHard Lessons From The Hurt Business. Eds got a large online following. He had a really rough life. He grew up in the projects in Pittsburgh and then enlisted in the National Guard. Later became a professional boxer. Now he's got a degree in physics. So those kinds of stories, I think, can be helpful, not necessarily in terms of specifics, like concrete step-by-step manuals for here's what to do, but more so in terms of mindset, in terms of outlook, in terms of just recognizing that there are other people out there who've had challenging life experiences and then finding a way to rise above it.
: You can draw inspiration from it. You have these kids who are essentially homeless. I mean, I don't remember the timeline it's set in, but they're trying to make their way and struggle through and find work. It has this feeling of like a Depression era in terms of chronology. Military memoirs are great. I mean, a recent one that got a lot of attention was David Goggins' book,
. I read that book after I'd already gotten into grad school, but he does a good job of outlining what it can be like to be someone who is aimless and adrift and continually engaging in self-defeating behaviors and then finding some inspiration through military structure. And so that's a good one, too. And one that's coming out soon that I'm excited about is Ed Latimores
. Eds got a large online following. He had a really rough life. He grew up in the projects in Pittsburgh and then enlisted in the National Guard. Later became a professional boxer. Now he's got a degree in physics. So those kinds of stories, I think, can be helpful, not necessarily in terms of specifics, like concrete step-by-step manuals for here's what to do, but more so in terms of mindset, in terms of outlook, in terms of just recognizing that there are other people out there who've had challenging life experiences and then finding a way to rise above it.
Yuri Bezmenov: Yeah, those are great recommendations. And in the Air Force or in the military more broadly, do they have recommended reading lists?
: Yeah, those are great recommendations. And in the Air Force or in the military more broadly, do they have recommended reading lists?
Dr. Rob Henderson: The officers do. Some of your listeners may be aware of this, but there's a two-tiered structure to the military. There's the enlisted side and the officer side. Military officersthats a leadership position, you need to go to college first. You have to have a bachelor's degree and then attend officer training school or you can go to West Point or Annapolis or the Air Force Academy, and you'll get a four-year degree through that experience. You'll get a bachelor's degree and you'll become an officer through the training at those institutions. And officers, they have recommended reading lists. Well-known officers and retired officers, people like Jim Mattis and others, they regularly put out recommended reading lists and books and so on. The enlisted side, not really. The enlisted members are front-line people, on the ground, the grunts if you will, and the frontline supervisors too, the non-commissioned officers. So I was enlisted. People who are enlisted, they often join right out of high school, often 18 or 19 years old. You don't need a college degree. You just join straight in, you go to boot camp and then you go through your training for your job and then you go straight to work. And then over time with rank, you can ascend into something like a middle management position, but you're never going to be a leader of a large military unit the way you would if you were an officer.
: The officers do. Some of your listeners may be aware of this, but there's a two-tiered structure to the military. There's the enlisted side and the officer side. Military officersthats a leadership position, you need to go to college first. You have to have a bachelor's degree and then attend officer training school or you can go to West Point or Annapolis or the Air Force Academy, and you'll get a four-year degree through that experience. You'll get a bachelor's degree and you'll become an officer through the training at those institutions. And officers, they have recommended reading lists. Well-known officers and retired officers, people like Jim Mattis and others, they regularly put out recommended reading lists and books and so on. The enlisted side, not really. The enlisted members are front-line people, on the ground, the grunts if you will, and the frontline supervisors too, the non-commissioned officers. So I was enlisted. People who are enlisted, they often join right out of high school, often 18 or 19 years old. You don't need a college degree. You just join straight in, you go to boot camp and then you go through your training for your job and then you go straight to work. And then over time with rank, you can ascend into something like a middle management position, but you're never going to be a leader of a large military unit the way you would if you were an officer.
There was an interesting kind of class divide. The military has an archaic class structure where the divide between the enlisted member and the officer is literally a bachelor's degree. And I noticed even as far back as when I was 17, 18 years old, when I first enlisted, I noticed there were these subtle differences in terms of family background, in terms of ambitions and aspirations, reading habits. Officers generally were more likely to read books and be more cosmopolitan in their outlook relative to the enlisted folks like me who were more provincial and more conservative in their preferences and outlooks.
Yuri Bezmenov: Interesting. It's always fascinating to see the military from the outside and especially now when there's such a smaller proportion of the population that's enlisted and then you always see the more senior generals, people like Milley or Austin who are at the highest ranks and you hear all the rumblings about how those senior ranks have been politicized, but in the front lines, that probably doesn't make much of an impact, right?
: Interesting. It's always fascinating to see the military from the outside and especially now when there's such a smaller proportion of the population that's enlisted and then you always see the more senior generals, people like Milley or Austin who are at the highest ranks and you hear all the rumblings about how those senior ranks have been politicized, but in the front lines, that probably doesn't make much of an impact, right?
Dr. Rob Henderson: Right. I've heard this from several other people, both enlisted and on the officer side, who say that in order to get to those senior officer positions, once you start to reach one-star or two-star general level, you essentially become a politician and you have to flatter the prejudices of the machine, the political class. And so there's a built-in filtering mechanism. You can be promoted as high as colonel if you're an officer who is a more traditional hard-edged military man who is, you know, a bit assertive or aggressive, with no time for politically correct nonsense. But then beyond that, beyond the colonel level, if you want that first star as a general, then you do have to play the game and be a more sort of genteel, politically savvy person. The people that we as civilians pay the most attention to are the leadership class.
: Right. I've heard this from several other people, both enlisted and on the officer side, who say that in order to get to those senior officer positions, once you start to reach one-star or two-star general level, you essentially become a politician and you have to flatter the prejudices of the machine, the political class. And so there's a built-in filtering mechanism. You can be promoted as high as colonel if you're an officer who is a more traditional hard-edged military man who is, you know, a bit assertive or aggressive, with no time for politically correct nonsense. But then beyond that, beyond the colonel level, if you want that first star as a general, then you do have to play the game and be a more sort of genteel, politically savvy person. The people that we as civilians pay the most attention to are the leadership class.
This is true in just about any organization. The higher up you go, the more you have to pledge fealty to the prevailing dogmas of our day. I've shared this survey on Twitter a couple of different times andcited it on my Substack. There was a survey of workers in the Soviet Union. The college-educated or university-educated citizens of the Soviet Union were two to three times more likely to say they support communist ideology compared to non-college-educated people. And then when they surveyed white-collar workers, office workers, they were likewise two to three times more likely to support communism compared with semi-skilled laborers and factory workers. And so, you know, whatever the fashionable ideology for educated people is, if you want to climb the ladder, you have to mouth those same slogans and at least outwardly profess the same views.
This is true in just about any organization. The higher up you go, the more you have to pledge fealty to the prevailing dogmas of our day. I've shared this survey on Twitter a couple of different times and
. There was a survey of workers in the Soviet Union. The college-educated or university-educated citizens of the Soviet Union were two to three times more likely to say they support communist ideology compared to non-college-educated people. And then when they surveyed white-collar workers, office workers, they were likewise two to three times more likely to support communism compared with semi-skilled laborers and factory workers. And so, you know, whatever the fashionable ideology for educated people is, if you want to climb the ladder, you have to mouth those same slogans and at least outwardly profess the same views.
Yuri Bezmenov: Well, it's a tale as old as time, I suppose, that communism becomes this luxury belief and the people who suffer from it most don't want it. But then the well-educated, indoctrinated, institutionalized, whatever you want to call them, they're the ones that are sticking to the dogma and are relatively insulated from the consequences of those dogmas. So you're in the Air Force and you get an acceptance letter into Yale. What were your expectations like and how did they differ from the reality once you hit the ground on campus?
: Well, it's a tale as old as time, I suppose, that communism becomes this luxury belief and the people who suffer from it most don't want it. But then the well-educated, indoctrinated, institutionalized, whatever you want to call them, they're the ones that are sticking to the dogma and are relatively insulated from the consequences of those dogmas. So you're in the Air Force and you get an acceptance letter into Yale. What were your expectations like and how did they differ from the reality once you hit the ground on campus?
Dr. Rob Henderson: Yale has a reputation. And I knew that most of the students would come from wealthy families, especially compared to the way that I grew up. And so I was at first shocked because I expected students to just be dressed in a, I don't know, I mean, I didn't necessarily expect them to dress in that sort of classic mid-20th-century Ivy League way with the tweed or the Letterman sweaters or something. But I did expect them to just dress in a more, I guess, luxurious fashion, upmarket, upscale way, and for the most part, everyone just looked like normal college students the way you would picture students at some flagship state university wearing flip-flops and cargo shorts and seemingly normal attire. I mean, some of them, you know, they were adopters of something like quiet luxury, where you couldn't necessarily tell the name brands that, you know, they were expensive, but they looked like casual wear. But overall, that was a surprise to me, just kind of how normal they all looked in terms of their material possessions.
: Yale has a reputation. And I knew that most of the students would come from wealthy families, especially compared to the way that I grew up. And so I was at first shocked because I expected students to just be dressed in a, I don't know, I mean, I didn't necessarily expect them to dress in that sort of classic mid-20th-century Ivy League way with the tweed or the Letterman sweaters or something. But I did expect them to just dress in a more, I guess, luxurious fashion, upmarket, upscale way, and for the most part, everyone just looked like normal college students the way you would picture students at some flagship state university wearing flip-flops and cargo shorts and seemingly normal attire. I mean, some of them, you know, they were adopters of something like quiet luxury, where you couldn't necessarily tell the name brands that, you know, they were expensive, but they looked like casual wear. But overall, that was a surprise to me, just kind of how normal they all looked in terms of their material possessions.
Yuri Bezmenov: We need to make prep style great again.
: We need to make prep style great again.
Dr. Rob Henderson: I actually do like that clean classic Ivy League look. You know, you read about the history of these elite schools, especially the Ivy League. And, you know, there were rules about especially when they were male-only that you couldn't enter the dining hall without a jacket and tie, which today is unthinkable. I mean, even the Yale Club in New York, they have a kind of business casual or smart casual dress code, which would have been unacceptable 50 or 60 years ago. And so that was a bit of a surprise. Although, you know, once I started talking to the students, and they dropped subtle hints about, you know, a place in the Hamptons or where they were going to summer or family connections and those kinds of things. Varied signals of family wealth started to leak out. But I expected that there was going to be an economic class difference. I wasn't prepared for the social class difference.
: I actually do like that clean classic Ivy League look. You know, you read about the history of these elite schools, especially the Ivy League. And, you know, there were rules about especially when they were male-only that you couldn't enter the dining hall without a jacket and tie, which today is unthinkable. I mean, even the Yale Club in New York, they have a kind of business casual or smart casual dress code, which would have been unacceptable 50 or 60 years ago. And so that was a bit of a surprise. Although, you know, once I started talking to the students, and they dropped subtle hints about, you know, a place in the Hamptons or where they were going to summer or family connections and those kinds of things. Varied signals of family wealth started to leak out. But I expected that there was going to be an economic class difference. I wasn't prepared for the social class difference.
In America, we spend a lot of time on economic class, on inequality, on poverty, on money, but not as much time is spent on the sort of social part of socioeconomic status. Specifically, what are the cultural differentiators between the social classes in terms of their attitudes, in terms of their beliefs, in terms of expectations for themselves and their children. This was where the seed of theluxury beliefsidea started to form in my mind. It was once I started to speak with the students and realize just how vastly different our experiences were, not just with money, but with personal and social experiences.
In America, we spend a lot of time on economic class, on inequality, on poverty, on money, but not as much time is spent on the sort of social part of socioeconomic status. Specifically, what are the cultural differentiators between the social classes in terms of their attitudes, in terms of their beliefs, in terms of expectations for themselves and their children. This was where the seed of the
idea started to form in my mind. It was once I started to speak with the students and realize just how vastly different our experiences were, not just with money, but with personal and social experiences.

**

Yuri Bezmenov: I saw some statistics about Ivy League students. At some of the universities, 40% of students come from families in the top 1%. For all the talk about diversity, there's a lack of diversity there. And of course, you have the lack of diversity intellectually and those two things have merged.
: I saw some statistics about Ivy League students. At some of the universities, 40% of students come from families in the top 1%. For all the talk about diversity, there's a lack of diversity there. And of course, you have the lack of diversity intellectually and those two things have merged.
Dr. Rob Henderson: Years ago I attended a talk by the former dean of admissions at an Ivy League college. He said something like, We call ourselves the Office of Admissions, but what we really are is the Office of Rejections. Because places like Yale and Harvard reject 95 percent of their applicants. They spend more of their time rejecting than accepting. These institutions pride themselves on being inclusive and belonging and whatever. But in reality they are highly exclusive. Theyre gatekeepers for the future ruling class. There's a lot of high-minded rhetoric about how they want to expand opportunity. What they really do, though, is identify people who match the criteria they're searching for and then they reject everyone else. There's a lot of doublespeak that I was unprepared for. It led me to think more deeply about social mobility. In my bookTroubledI discuss what I call trickle-down diversity. People who run these institutions would mock the idea of trickle-down economics. This idea that if we just let rich people keep all their money, then magically those resources will trickle down to the rest of society. But elite colleges engaged in a similar practice with their views on DEI. Their vision of social justice seems to be that as long as the ruling class is 50% women and 13% Black and 7% Asian and x percent LGBT and so on, that somehow because the elite look roughly like the rest of society, that somehow social justice has been achieved, and somehow this will work to the advantage of women everywhere or Black people everywhere, Asians everywhere. How does this work? The person who sits in the seat of the Harvard president's office, that's a Black woman or a member of some other historically marginalized group, but then how does that help poor Black people in the country? They pat themselves on the back and think they'd done something to achieve some milestone of social justice each time they would announce that, you know, the incoming class of 2029 or whatever is as diverse as ever. Meanwhile, the people who are struggling, the people who they claim to speak on behalf of are doing worse than ever in terms of life expectancy and crime and incarceration and out-of-wedlock birth rates and drug addiction and so on.
: Years ago I attended a talk by the former dean of admissions at an Ivy League college. He said something like, We call ourselves the Office of Admissions, but what we really are is the Office of Rejections. Because places like Yale and Harvard reject 95 percent of their applicants. They spend more of their time rejecting than accepting. These institutions pride themselves on being inclusive and belonging and whatever. But in reality they are highly exclusive. Theyre gatekeepers for the future ruling class. There's a lot of high-minded rhetoric about how they want to expand opportunity. What they really do, though, is identify people who match the criteria they're searching for and then they reject everyone else. There's a lot of doublespeak that I was unprepared for. It led me to think more deeply about social mobility. In my book
I discuss what I call trickle-down diversity. People who run these institutions would mock the idea of trickle-down economics. This idea that if we just let rich people keep all their money, then magically those resources will trickle down to the rest of society. But elite colleges engaged in a similar practice with their views on DEI. Their vision of social justice seems to be that as long as the ruling class is 50% women and 13% Black and 7% Asian and x percent LGBT and so on, that somehow because the elite look roughly like the rest of society, that somehow social justice has been achieved, and somehow this will work to the advantage of women everywhere or Black people everywhere, Asians everywhere. How does this work? The person who sits in the seat of the Harvard president's office, that's a Black woman or a member of some other historically marginalized group, but then how does that help poor Black people in the country? They pat themselves on the back and think they'd done something to achieve some milestone of social justice each time they would announce that, you know, the incoming class of 2029 or whatever is as diverse as ever. Meanwhile, the people who are struggling, the people who they claim to speak on behalf of are doing worse than ever in terms of life expectancy and crime and incarceration and out-of-wedlock birth rates and drug addiction and so on.
Yuri Bezmenov: Yeah.
: Yeah.
Dr. Rob Henderson: Theres this flawed view of social mobility. Elite colleges stripmine talented youngsters from their hometowns and what those young people do is then they relocate to one of a handful of major cities to live alongside people like them. And it's a rational choice at an individual level. If you're someone like, say, JD Vance and you grew up in the sticks in Ohio and then you go off to Yale Law School, very few people in those circumstances are going to go back to Ohio after that. Now, to JD's credit, he did. He went back to Ohio and ran for Senate and he was successful, but most people wont do that. Most people are going to move to New York. They're going to move to San Francisco. They're going to move to a major metropolitan city in search of economic opportunity, social opportunities, romantic opportunities, and there's this segregation along class lines. Harvard or Stanford says, oh, we're taking these poor kids from the middle of the country and educating them. But then there's this kind of brain drain phenomenon where more and more smart people are going to the coasts and going to these cities and never returning. Im not saying these institutions shouldnt accept these applicants, of course. What I am saying is that this strategy doesnt help marginalized groups the way these colleges claim.
: Theres this flawed view of social mobility. Elite colleges stripmine talented youngsters from their hometowns and what those young people do is then they relocate to one of a handful of major cities to live alongside people like them. And it's a rational choice at an individual level. If you're someone like, say, JD Vance and you grew up in the sticks in Ohio and then you go off to Yale Law School, very few people in those circumstances are going to go back to Ohio after that. Now, to JD's credit, he did. He went back to Ohio and ran for Senate and he was successful, but most people wont do that. Most people are going to move to New York. They're going to move to San Francisco. They're going to move to a major metropolitan city in search of economic opportunity, social opportunities, romantic opportunities, and there's this segregation along class lines. Harvard or Stanford says, oh, we're taking these poor kids from the middle of the country and educating them. But then there's this kind of brain drain phenomenon where more and more smart people are going to the coasts and going to these cities and never returning. Im not saying these institutions shouldnt accept these applicants, of course. What I am saying is that this strategy doesnt help marginalized groups the way these colleges claim.

**

Dr. Rob Henderson: I wanted to say something about your point about the donations and getting kids into these elite schools. I find it fascinating that, again, we spend so much time talking about money, but if class was really just about money, if money was really the ticket to get ahead in America, then a lot of these rich parents wouldn't bother donating $100 million to Princeton or whatever. They would just give the $100 million to the kid or take the $100 million and invest it in some safe, low-risk investment. And by the time the kid is, whatever, 18 years old or 25 years old, some kind of trust, then that'll be worth a lot more. And so the kid has no need to have that minted degree from some elite institution. But a lot of these wealthy families are aware that it's not just about the number in your bank account. It's also about your CV. It's about the kinds of people you know, the networks you're plugged into. All of those kinds of things matter too. And so they're willing to exchange a ton of economic capital in order to acquire social and cultural capital.
: I wanted to say something about your point about the donations and getting kids into these elite schools. I find it fascinating that, again, we spend so much time talking about money, but if class was really just about money, if money was really the ticket to get ahead in America, then a lot of these rich parents wouldn't bother donating $100 million to Princeton or whatever. They would just give the $100 million to the kid or take the $100 million and invest it in some safe, low-risk investment. And by the time the kid is, whatever, 18 years old or 25 years old, some kind of trust, then that'll be worth a lot more. And so the kid has no need to have that minted degree from some elite institution. But a lot of these wealthy families are aware that it's not just about the number in your bank account. It's also about your CV. It's about the kinds of people you know, the networks you're plugged into. All of those kinds of things matter too. And so they're willing to exchange a ton of economic capital in order to acquire social and cultural capital.

**

Yuri Bezmenov: You speak oncampusesa lot. How much of a vibe shift have you seen?
: You speak on
a lot. How much of a vibe shift have you seen?
Dr. Rob Henderson: A friend of mine used to work as a server at Yale reunions for the alumni. And he told me that most of the time when he would overhear the Yale president speaking with donors, you know, these are all white-haired donors, Yale class of 1972 or whatever, he would hear the president basically continually reassuring the donors that Yale is totally pro-free speech, Yale supports academic freedom, Yale supports, you know, the right for students to speak their minds, professors to teach whatever they want without interference. The president is saying one thing to the donors and then he'll often say something completely different to the students. And same with the administration and the professors more generally, just, you know, they have this kind of double message, this duplicity of they want to keep the money going, they want to keep the endowment high, and they want the prestige and the reputation, but they also want to support this bizarre ideology that's supported really only by, you know, maybe 10 or 20 of the students and faculty numerical minority, but they will have disproportionate power.
: A friend of mine used to work as a server at Yale reunions for the alumni. And he told me that most of the time when he would overhear the Yale president speaking with donors, you know, these are all white-haired donors, Yale class of 1972 or whatever, he would hear the president basically continually reassuring the donors that Yale is totally pro-free speech, Yale supports academic freedom, Yale supports, you know, the right for students to speak their minds, professors to teach whatever they want without interference. The president is saying one thing to the donors and then he'll often say something completely different to the students. And same with the administration and the professors more generally, just, you know, they have this kind of double message, this duplicity of they want to keep the money going, they want to keep the endowment high, and they want the prestige and the reputation, but they also want to support this bizarre ideology that's supported really only by, you know, maybe 10 or 20 of the students and faculty numerical minority, but they will have disproportionate power.
Anyway, I'm surprised I've been invited to any of these places to speak. Now, to be fair, the organizations that tend to invite me on these campuses to speak about my book are usually the more kind of free speech or heterodox or conservative organizations. And I think they're trying, they're trying to push back as best they can. But I think what happened is, you know, as a friend of mine at Cambridge, Nathan Cofnas, likes to say that woke isn't dead. It's just consolidating its gains. They've essentially canceled everyone already. Like all of the academics, not all, but the majority of the academics who pushed back against the prevailing dogma, they have either been pressured to resign or they have been penalized in some way or another. And when that happens, especially when it's a high-profile case with someone like Roland Fryer at Harvard or someone like Amy Wax at Penn. And there are countless other examples since 2020, as I'm sure you all know, or even really ever since 2015, 2016.
But it accelerated in 2020. So each time there's a high-profile case of an academic getting canceled, all of the other academics witness what happens and they subsequently keep their mouth shut. This is one of the tactics of adherence to identity politics. One of their tactics is they pick a notable person, wait for them to say something insensitive, and then they pull out all the stopspetitions, picketing, protests, emails, phone calls, and so on. They turn it into a media event. Every other academic who might have something interesting or provocative to say, or even just something true to say, sees that and receives the message and learns to keep their mouth shut. This is a clever tactic on the part of these activists.
Professors are generally center-left liberalsthey don't have their heart and soul invested in politics. They just want to do their work. They just want to do their research. But if they're receiving 30 or 40 phone calls and 100 emails a day from activists saying, "Why haven't you denounced your colleague? Why haven't you come out and spoken against them? Why are you still supervising this PhD student who said something offensive? Why haven't you signed our petition yet?" That can be anxiety-inducing. Even if it's not anxiety-inducing, it's just annoying. If you're an academic, you usually just want to do your research, you want to write, you want to do your experiments and your projects or whatever, and you don't want to deal with your inbox being flooded by lunatics. So a lot of these people will just sign the petition, mouth the slogan, and say what they need to say to be left alone. There's a lot of cowardice involved there too.
Yuri Bezmenov: Yeah, there's a great ancient Chinese proverb on this called "kill the chicken to scare the monkey." You can apply this to any situation where you've got a struggle session mob going after somebody and making an example out of them.
: Yeah, there's a great ancient Chinese proverb on this called "kill the chicken to scare the monkey." You can apply this to any situation where you've got a struggle session mob going after somebody and making an example out of them.

**

Yuri Bezmenov: I agree with you and a lot of the people who say that woke is not going away at all. We're barely in the second or third inning. They're very much entrenched right now. With the universities too, I feel like they're somewhat of a microcosm of MAGA in this odd way because we as a country, the biggest economy in the world with a huge treasury of funds to spend on our citizens, but none of it really trickles down to us. It all gets sent abroad, sent through, or grifted away by administrators and corrupt actors. The same thing happens in universities on a smaller scale because they've got huge endowments, billions and billions of dollars, wealthy donors sending the money in. Students also have to pay a heavy price tag in tuition, but they're like, "Where does all that money go?" A lot of times, they can barely get a couple thousand dollars for a student activity office to help sponsor an event, so you've got layers and layers of administrators. On top of that, to add insult to injury in this weird physical and mental gap, so much of the activism is focused on things so far away, like in Gazathe most prominent examplebut meanwhile, they're marching around at Yale. They're in New Haven, which is a really, really rundown city. UPenn is in West Philadelphia, also a pretty rough area. Columbia is in Harlem. You could go on and on. On the West Coast, Berkeley is not that far from Red Bluff where you grew up, but no one at Berkeley thinks about helping other people in California; they're thinking about what's going on in the Middle East, which is literally on the other side of the world from the West Coast. So it's this very strange, distorted funhouse mirror of what actually gets these students passionate and fired up with their time and energy.
: I agree with you and a lot of the people who say that woke is not going away at all. We're barely in the second or third inning. They're very much entrenched right now. With the universities too, I feel like they're somewhat of a microcosm of MAGA in this odd way because we as a country, the biggest economy in the world with a huge treasury of funds to spend on our citizens, but none of it really trickles down to us. It all gets sent abroad, sent through, or grifted away by administrators and corrupt actors. The same thing happens in universities on a smaller scale because they've got huge endowments, billions and billions of dollars, wealthy donors sending the money in. Students also have to pay a heavy price tag in tuition, but they're like, "Where does all that money go?" A lot of times, they can barely get a couple thousand dollars for a student activity office to help sponsor an event, so you've got layers and layers of administrators. On top of that, to add insult to injury in this weird physical and mental gap, so much of the activism is focused on things so far away, like in Gazathe most prominent examplebut meanwhile, they're marching around at Yale. They're in New Haven, which is a really, really rundown city. UPenn is in West Philadelphia, also a pretty rough area. Columbia is in Harlem. You could go on and on. On the West Coast, Berkeley is not that far from Red Bluff where you grew up, but no one at Berkeley thinks about helping other people in California; they're thinking about what's going on in the Middle East, which is literally on the other side of the world from the West Coast. So it's this very strange, distorted funhouse mirror of what actually gets these students passionate and fired up with their time and energy.
Dr. Rob Henderson: Yeah, yeah, that's well put. I mean, yeah, it's what's happening in Gaza or what's happening in Ukraine, and all of those things are worth thinking about. But a lot of these students and graduates of elite institutions think far more, speak more, and post more about what's happening on the other side of the world than what's happening three blocks down the street from them. It's no wonder we're polarized more and more along educational, class, and political lines because the people who are supposed to be leading the country and setting an example and wielding disproportionate influence on culture and politics, and the kind of story we tell ourselves about who we are, they're focused on people who are so far removed from them rather than the people who are struggling here at home. Ordinary people can sense on some level that the elites who are supposed to be in charge or the people who are in a position to shape the culture in some way are not really thinking about them. And when they are, it's more so about how to change their views or impose their own personal ideology onto them, their own sort of pet political project, and less so trying to understand what's afflicting them and how to help.
: Yeah, yeah, that's well put. I mean, yeah, it's what's happening in Gaza or what's happening in Ukraine, and all of those things are worth thinking about. But a lot of these students and graduates of elite institutions think far more, speak more, and post more about what's happening on the other side of the world than what's happening three blocks down the street from them. It's no wonder we're polarized more and more along educational, class, and political lines because the people who are supposed to be leading the country and setting an example and wielding disproportionate influence on culture and politics, and the kind of story we tell ourselves about who we are, they're focused on people who are so far removed from them rather than the people who are struggling here at home. Ordinary people can sense on some level that the elites who are supposed to be in charge or the people who are in a position to shape the culture in some way are not really thinking about them. And when they are, it's more so about how to change their views or impose their own personal ideology onto them, their own sort of pet political project, and less so trying to understand what's afflicting them and how to help.
This is something else that I write about inTroubledabout this kind of divide along being informed. When I was growing up and when I was in the military, I'd never once heard anyone say it was important to be informed. Then I get to college and suddenly I'm hearing that term everywhere about being informed, keeping up with current events, reading the news. What I learned is that it wasn't important so much to know about the concrete details of a newsworthy event, like, "There was this attack that occurred at this location at this time and X number of people died, and here was the weapon that was used, and here was the motivation of the killer," and so on and so forth. It was more so, "What does this mean and how am I supposed to think about it?" And, "What does this say more broadly about world order or geopolitics etc." People cared more about consuming secondhand commentary and absorbing the right opinions about the event rather than learning about the event itself. College-educated people are much more interested in national and international news than in local news, whereas working-class people and people who didn't go to college are more likely to subscribe to local news and care more about what's going on around them than what's happening on the other side of the world. If you're a pundit or a policymaker of some sort, then of course it makes sense to keep up with global news. But for most people, even most educated people, there's no concrete value to knowing what's happening in Ukraine other than to participate in conversations at the water cooler or at the office about it so that you can signal your membership into the educated class. It's not as important to know what's going on in the worst neighborhoods in the city you live in.
This is something else that I write about in
about this kind of divide along being informed. When I was growing up and when I was in the military, I'd never once heard anyone say it was important to be informed. Then I get to college and suddenly I'm hearing that term everywhere about being informed, keeping up with current events, reading the news. What I learned is that it wasn't important so much to know about the concrete details of a newsworthy event, like, "There was this attack that occurred at this location at this time and X number of people died, and here was the weapon that was used, and here was the motivation of the killer," and so on and so forth. It was more so, "What does this mean and how am I supposed to think about it?" And, "What does this say more broadly about world order or geopolitics etc." People cared more about consuming secondhand commentary and absorbing the right opinions about the event rather than learning about the event itself. College-educated people are much more interested in national and international news than in local news, whereas working-class people and people who didn't go to college are more likely to subscribe to local news and care more about what's going on around them than what's happening on the other side of the world. If you're a pundit or a policymaker of some sort, then of course it makes sense to keep up with global news. But for most people, even most educated people, there's no concrete value to knowing what's happening in Ukraine other than to participate in conversations at the water cooler or at the office about it so that you can signal your membership into the educated class. It's not as important to know what's going on in the worst neighborhoods in the city you live in.

**

Yuri Bezmenov: One thing I've been grappling with a lot, which is kind of a meta point, I feel like you're the perfect person to shed some insight on this. To what degree do the holders of luxury beliefs realize that they have luxury beliefs? It's kind of like that Principal Skinner meme where it's like, "Hey, am I out of touch?" No, it's like everyone else is a bunch of deplorables. And it has been going on for a decade. So how much do you think it's starting to get through to them? And what have been the best ways that you've seen in helping people just have a fresh perspective on these things instead of continuing on their dogmas and beliefs?
: One thing I've been grappling with a lot, which is kind of a meta point, I feel like you're the perfect person to shed some insight on this. To what degree do the holders of luxury beliefs realize that they have luxury beliefs? It's kind of like that Principal Skinner meme where it's like, "Hey, am I out of touch?" No, it's like everyone else is a bunch of deplorables. And it has been going on for a decade. So how much do you think it's starting to get through to them? And what have been the best ways that you've seen in helping people just have a fresh perspective on these things instead of continuing on their dogmas and beliefs?
Dr. Rob Henderson: To what extent are the holders of luxury beliefs conscious of it? Most people just want to feel like they're doing the right thing, that they're compassionate and empathic. There's a lot of guilt as well among upper and upper middle class people. They espouse these luxury beliefs about defunding the police, decriminalizing all drugs, abolishing prisons, and bizarre ideas around family formation. A lot of them have convinced themselves that taking an unconventional, strange view that destigmatizing poor choices is helpful. Somehow, this is going to help body positivity, fat acceptanceall of these things that actually a little bit of judgment and a little bit of shame can motivate people to do things to improve their lives or to avoid catastrophic blunders. I'm thinking about a great quote from T.S. Eliot: "Half of the harm that is done in this world is due to people who want to feel important. They don't mean to do harm, but they're absorbed in the endless struggle to think well of themselves." A lot of the harm, I think, is inadvertent. Now, that being said, I suspect that 10% or 20% of the espousers of luxury beliefs are actively malicious in some way. Maybe they don't necessarily mean to hurt the individuals who suffer as a result of their policy proposals, whether it's eliminating law enforcement or flooding the streets with drugs or criminals, but their malice is aimed at the system or capitalism or Western culture or the American project. A lot of them have anarchic or socialist or communist sympathies. Their malice is about how to undermine the system, how to shake people's confidence in the American project. They will promote homelessness or funnel funds or volunteer to keep homeless encampments going in order to maintain visible eyesores in major cities as a visible reminder of the supposed failures of capitalism. They don't necessarily want to hurt those homeless people, but they just view them as useful pawns in their quest. Its a means to an end, which would be some kind of anarchic or socialist revolution.
: To what extent are the holders of luxury beliefs conscious of it? Most people just want to feel like they're doing the right thing, that they're compassionate and empathic. There's a lot of guilt as well among upper and upper middle class people. They espouse these luxury beliefs about defunding the police, decriminalizing all drugs, abolishing prisons, and bizarre ideas around family formation. A lot of them have convinced themselves that taking an unconventional, strange view that destigmatizing poor choices is helpful. Somehow, this is going to help body positivity, fat acceptanceall of these things that actually a little bit of judgment and a little bit of shame can motivate people to do things to improve their lives or to avoid catastrophic blunders. I'm thinking about a great quote from T.S. Eliot: "Half of the harm that is done in this world is due to people who want to feel important. They don't mean to do harm, but they're absorbed in the endless struggle to think well of themselves." A lot of the harm, I think, is inadvertent. Now, that being said, I suspect that 10% or 20% of the espousers of luxury beliefs are actively malicious in some way. Maybe they don't necessarily mean to hurt the individuals who suffer as a result of their policy proposals, whether it's eliminating law enforcement or flooding the streets with drugs or criminals, but their malice is aimed at the system or capitalism or Western culture or the American project. A lot of them have anarchic or socialist or communist sympathies. Their malice is about how to undermine the system, how to shake people's confidence in the American project. They will promote homelessness or funnel funds or volunteer to keep homeless encampments going in order to maintain visible eyesores in major cities as a visible reminder of the supposed failures of capitalism. They don't necessarily want to hurt those homeless people, but they just view them as useful pawns in their quest. Its a means to an end, which would be some kind of anarchic or socialist revolution.

**

Yuri Bezmenov: What about the remaining 80% or so who are going along with it? How many of those people are aware that this is a luxury belief? Before it was called first-world problems, but these are things that you can afford to think about and care about because you have pretty much everything else materially provided for or sometimes luxuriously so.
: What about the remaining 80% or so who are going along with it? How many of those people are aware that this is a luxury belief? Before it was called first-world problems, but these are things that you can afford to think about and care about because you have pretty much everything else materially provided for or sometimes luxuriously so.
Dr. Rob Henderson: The majority of those remaining 80% are just naive normal people, mostly good, who aren't thinking that deeply about their beliefs. They just sound good. They see some legacy media outlet choose a spokesperson who claims to speak on behalf of this or that marginalized group and say, "Oh, well, the way we help these people is to defund the police." If you're an educated person and you are busy and don't have that much time to think through your views, you just see that and think, "Okay, well, I guess that's what people want," and so let's just go along with it. But I still think that even if you're pressed for time, if you're fortunate enough to make a lot of money, to be highly educated, to be in a comfortable position in your life, you have an obligation to think through the beliefs that you hold and think through who you vote for and the policies that you support and the ideas that you espouse in your peer groups. I think that's most people. Theyre naive. The remaining people are just cowards, where they actually do know that these views are probably not great. They harbor suspicions that these luxury beliefs actually sound a little bit crazy. But you also don't want to get fired. You don't want to lose your friends. You don't want to be ostracized. So they just tacitly accept it and go along with it and hope that it blows over. So you have, roughly, the amoral Machiavellians, the naive normal people, and the cowards.
: The majority of those remaining 80% are just naive normal people, mostly good, who aren't thinking that deeply about their beliefs. They just sound good. They see some legacy media outlet choose a spokesperson who claims to speak on behalf of this or that marginalized group and say, "Oh, well, the way we help these people is to defund the police." If you're an educated person and you are busy and don't have that much time to think through your views, you just see that and think, "Okay, well, I guess that's what people want," and so let's just go along with it. But I still think that even if you're pressed for time, if you're fortunate enough to make a lot of money, to be highly educated, to be in a comfortable position in your life, you have an obligation to think through the beliefs that you hold and think through who you vote for and the policies that you support and the ideas that you espouse in your peer groups. I think that's most people. Theyre naive. The remaining people are just cowards, where they actually do know that these views are probably not great. They harbor suspicions that these luxury beliefs actually sound a little bit crazy. But you also don't want to get fired. You don't want to lose your friends. You don't want to be ostracized. So they just tacitly accept it and go along with it and hope that it blows over. So you have, roughly, the amoral Machiavellians, the naive normal people, and the cowards.
Yuri Bezmenov: Yeah, well, those three categoriesI would guess that the naive are the easiest ones to get to wake up and change their minds. What have you seen work on that side? Because the hardest part is just undoing all of the cognitive dissonance and the institutionalization and the weaponization of words that sound good and people go along with, but then have a rude awakening that it's not getting the good results that they think it would.
: Yeah, well, those three categoriesI would guess that the naive are the easiest ones to get to wake up and change their minds. What have you seen work on that side? Because the hardest part is just undoing all of the cognitive dissonance and the institutionalization and the weaponization of words that sound good and people go along with, but then have a rude awakening that it's not getting the good results that they think it would.
Dr. Rob Henderson: Yeah, it's tough, man. I've never actually seen the light bulb go off live. I've never actually seen someone come, have that come-to-Jesus moment of, "Oh, everything I believe up to this point has been stupid." It's more so over... I've received emails from readers of mine where they were kind of fence sitters. They had these doubts. But then they read something I wrote, or something that I had linked, or just over time, you kind of slowly immerse yourself in alternate viewpoints and then gradually you come to realize that, "Oh, I can't believe I believed all of that stuff." So it's a kind of slow, gradual process. There's that line about how you can't reason someone out of a belief they didn't reason themselves into. I don't know if that's actually true. I mean, I've seen people reasonthey hold a view they don't know why and someone has reasoned them out of it. But I think when it comes to views that are important for social acceptance or your employment prospects, people willits very hard to get people to see why it's misguided. Who originated that quote about how it's very difficult for a man to see the truth when his salary depends on him not seeing it?
: Yeah, it's tough, man. I've never actually seen the light bulb go off live. I've never actually seen someone come, have that come-to-Jesus moment of, "Oh, everything I believe up to this point has been stupid." It's more so over... I've received emails from readers of mine where they were kind of fence sitters. They had these doubts. But then they read something I wrote, or something that I had linked, or just over time, you kind of slowly immerse yourself in alternate viewpoints and then gradually you come to realize that, "Oh, I can't believe I believed all of that stuff." So it's a kind of slow, gradual process. There's that line about how you can't reason someone out of a belief they didn't reason themselves into. I don't know if that's actually true. I mean, I've seen people reasonthey hold a view they don't know why and someone has reasoned them out of it. But I think when it comes to views that are important for social acceptance or your employment prospects, people willits very hard to get people to see why it's misguided. Who originated that quote about how it's very difficult for a man to see the truth when his salary depends on him not seeing it?
Yuri Bezmenov: Yeah.
: Yeah.
Dr. Rob Henderson: That might have been Upton Sinclair.
: That might have been Upton Sinclair.
Yuri Bezmenov: Okay, that sounds right. And then Twain had one about... I forget the Twain one, but you cannot reason with the demoralized person.
: Okay, that sounds right. And then Twain had one about... I forget the Twain one, but you cannot reason with the demoralized person.
Dr. Rob Henderson: A lot of people just go along with whatever the legacy media tells them. I used to be skeptical of this because I myself like to believe I'm not this way. Maybe I am. But I used to not think that people actually cared that much about what legacy media said. "Oh, the New York Times says this," and then people get a software update. "Oh, that's what I'm supposed to believe now." I used to think people werent that simple. But sadly, a lot of people are out there. And so I think there is value in whatever you want to call it, that kind of viewpoint diversity idea of basically getting more conservatives or more heterodox people into staff positions at elite institutions, whether it's a columnist atThe New York Timesor a professor at an elite institution or whatever, like having a voice at one of these places, it probably does move the needle in some direction.
: A lot of people just go along with whatever the legacy media tells them. I used to be skeptical of this because I myself like to believe I'm not this way. Maybe I am. But I used to not think that people actually cared that much about what legacy media said. "Oh, the New York Times says this," and then people get a software update. "Oh, that's what I'm supposed to believe now." I used to think people werent that simple. But sadly, a lot of people are out there. And so I think there is value in whatever you want to call it, that kind of viewpoint diversity idea of basically getting more conservatives or more heterodox people into staff positions at elite institutions, whether it's a columnist at
or a professor at an elite institution or whatever, like having a voice at one of these places, it probably does move the needle in some direction.
I've had a piece or two placed in some of these outlets and that does get a lot of attention and reaches people who ordinarily wouldn't hear a point of view like that. So that may be another project worth pursuing. And then the other, I think, is just kind of doing what you're doing, what I'm doing. If you're an independent creator, podcaster, writer, just keep going, keep putting your work out there and people will share it. Some people just need to be ready for it. Some people, they're just, you know, they'll read your stuff or listen to your podcast at the right moment and it'll hit them just at the right time. So I think the idea is to just keep writing and keep pointing out absurdities.

**

Yuri Bezmenov: We can coin this brochure diversity because these colleges want to have that perfect picture of the main green where you've got every type of person in terms of physical appearance. But then when you drill down, you're like, okay, well, 40% of these kids, no matter what their race, are coming from a very wealthy subset of society. And I think on top of that, the more, I guess, the tougher thing to have seen is that that brochure photo doesn't really happen. Like if you walk into a dining hall, you're not going to see that type of mixture. You're probably going to see self-segregation. Like there's going to be one group of kids sitting at one table, another group of kids sitting somewhere else because, for one reason or another, they just decide to gravitate towards each other socially. And I'm sure it's gotten a lot worse when you have this constant institutional weight put on DEI and you start dividing people into oppressor and oppressed groups.
: We can coin this brochure diversity because these colleges want to have that perfect picture of the main green where you've got every type of person in terms of physical appearance. But then when you drill down, you're like, okay, well, 40% of these kids, no matter what their race, are coming from a very wealthy subset of society. And I think on top of that, the more, I guess, the tougher thing to have seen is that that brochure photo doesn't really happen. Like if you walk into a dining hall, you're not going to see that type of mixture. You're probably going to see self-segregation. Like there's going to be one group of kids sitting at one table, another group of kids sitting somewhere else because, for one reason or another, they just decide to gravitate towards each other socially. And I'm sure it's gotten a lot worse when you have this constant institutional weight put on DEI and you start dividing people into oppressor and oppressed groups.
One thing that I saw firsthand was just like the lack of transparency and gamesmanship that goes on in the admissions office. So if you take a step back, you've got to wonder, wow, the admissions officer who lets you into one of these schools is probably one of the most influential people in your life, but you will never meet them. You know, you really have to go hunt them down. And most people, once they get onto campus, they don't think about, like, oh, who was it that read my application, decided I was worthy to take a seat in the freshman class here. You know, they're just like sitting in a building. And I actually worked an on-campus job there while I was a student and was just like a file monkey. I would open all the envelopes that came in and there'd be this huge room, manila folders, filing cabinets, and I would put different pieces of the application all together. And of course, while you're moving these things around, you do see some post-it notes, you see some scribbles by admissions officers, and then you really start to see, okay, well, clearly someone in the development office or someone in the athletics office went and had a conversation with an admissions officer. So that's why this student is now rising to the top of the pile. And of course, like I wouldn't know the full scope of the data and what kind of merits they had, but like all these games, we're probably getting played very heavily in peak DEI, but they're never going to go away. I think in some regards now, the ticket of getting one of those special post-it notes has just gone up because it's not enough to have double legacy and both your parents are doctors who donate thousands of dollars every year loyally. Like, no, you have to be the son of a hedge fund manager who's giving millions or even getting a building or endowing a professorship to get that truly VIP access.
Dr. Rob Henderson: To that earlier point about self-segregation, you see this at elite campuses where they're not doing themselves any favors in terms of promoting integration among the students because a lot of these universities have their own sort of special cultural houses and cultural centers. So the Black students will go off to their center, the Latino students will go off to theirs, the Asian students and so on. And the idea here was to sort of make these students feel more welcome, give them a space, whatever. But then often what happens is they just sort of isolate themselves. And I think this is one of the kind of unspoken or under-discussed factors and why there's kind of these racial antagonistic movements on elite campuses, because they spend so much time in like a sort of physical echo chamber where they're only hearing people from themselves, people who agree with them, and they're not as exposed and they're not around people who look and think differently from themselves.
: To that earlier point about self-segregation, you see this at elite campuses where they're not doing themselves any favors in terms of promoting integration among the students because a lot of these universities have their own sort of special cultural houses and cultural centers. So the Black students will go off to their center, the Latino students will go off to theirs, the Asian students and so on. And the idea here was to sort of make these students feel more welcome, give them a space, whatever. But then often what happens is they just sort of isolate themselves. And I think this is one of the kind of unspoken or under-discussed factors and why there's kind of these racial antagonistic movements on elite campuses, because they spend so much time in like a sort of physical echo chamber where they're only hearing people from themselves, people who agree with them, and they're not as exposed and they're not around people who look and think differently from themselves.
Yuri Bezmenov: I've never seen a brochure that calls attention to veterans and ex-military students. So did people treat you differently on campus once they found out that you were a veteran?
: I've never seen a brochure that calls attention to veterans and ex-military students. So did people treat you differently on campus once they found out that you were a veteran?
Dr. Rob Henderson: Yeah, mostly it was positive. They were just generally curious because, as you mentioned before, very few people serve now. There was a survey recently showing that something like 40% of the Silent Generation served in the military among men. And then for Boomers, it was about 20%. And for Millennials, it's 4%. And I'd imagine for Gen Z, it's even lower than that. And so we were rare, at least enlisted vets, on campus. Most of the reactions were positive. Others were, you know, there was one girl who, she didn't say anything negative, but I could tell she didn't like it, but she didn't outwardly express anything derogatory. But I could tell just from, you know, she had like a septum piercing and she just had all the markers of someone who wouldn't be a huge fan of, you know, maybe she would call it the military-industrial complex or something.
: Yeah, mostly it was positive. They were just generally curious because, as you mentioned before, very few people serve now. There was a survey recently showing that something like 40% of the Silent Generation served in the military among men. And then for Boomers, it was about 20%. And for Millennials, it's 4%. And I'd imagine for Gen Z, it's even lower than that. And so we were rare, at least enlisted vets, on campus. Most of the reactions were positive. Others were, you know, there was one girl who, she didn't say anything negative, but I could tell she didn't like it, but she didn't outwardly express anything derogatory. But I could tell just from, you know, she had like a septum piercing and she just had all the markers of someone who wouldn't be a huge fan of, you know, maybe she would call it the military-industrial complex or something.
Yuri Bezmenov: Yeah, that's the X factor, the intangible part about what you and I do, what a lot of people like us do. We know how many people are subscribed to our emails, but you don't know when people are stumbling into you and they might not sign up for email, but they might read you and things might eventually get through and they'll have a light bulb moment that is the result of many months or even years of just stewing on these ideas a bit more and who knows, right? By the way, the Mark Twain quote is, "It's easier to fool people than to convince them that they've been fooled." That's great. We're on the second end of that because when people have spent decades imbibingThe New York Timesand CNN, waiting for those latest chip upgrades on what they should support or hate next, we're chipping away.
: Yeah, that's the X factor, the intangible part about what you and I do, what a lot of people like us do. We know how many people are subscribed to our emails, but you don't know when people are stumbling into you and they might not sign up for email, but they might read you and things might eventually get through and they'll have a light bulb moment that is the result of many months or even years of just stewing on these ideas a bit more and who knows, right? By the way, the Mark Twain quote is, "It's easier to fool people than to convince them that they've been fooled." That's great. We're on the second end of that because when people have spent decades imbibing
and CNN, waiting for those latest chip upgrades on what they should support or hate next, we're chipping away.
Yeah, look, it does feel like we've reached this inflection point towards the end of 2024, post-election, post-Elon taking over Twitter and shifting the narrative. In this upcoming administration, you've got a couple of prominent elder millennials who are, like you, just symbols of upward mobility and meritocracy, defying the odds and being that small percentage of people from places that you wouldn't expect to go to Ivy Leagues and then hold these great careers and positions. Who are we talking about? I'm referring to JD Vance, but also Pete Hayseth in a way. I didn't know much about him. He's a veteran. He's seen combat. And he's only, what, 43, 44? Yeah. He also comes from a small town in the Midwest and ended up going to Princeton and Harvard. Of course, the legacy media is attacking these guys as unqualified, but you think to our founding fathers, they were all in their 20s or 30s, and JD's almost 40. It does feel like this changing of the guard, and we're both somewhat in that demographic, at least age-wise. The question I want to close with on a positive note is just with you and JD, but many other examples of this. How do you, if you were to just tell the administration, "Hey, here's like three, four things that you can do to help create more people like us, to give those people opportunities to maximize their potential and their talent and contribute to this country," what do you think we should do for that?
Dr. Rob Henderson: Oh man, this could be like a whole hour of its own. One piece of advice for them is to understand that the world is vying for your attention. Everywhere you turn, someone's trying to sell you something or capture you or get you hooked on something. So be aware of that. Spend more time focusing on yourself, on self-improvement, on learning about yourself, about the world, about other people. The advice is hard to give, it's hard to give blanket advice that's universally applicable because not every kid is as bright as someone like JD Vance. A lot of the guys who grew up withare very capable in many ways, but not all of them, even in kind of optimal circumstances, not all of them were going to go to Yale Law School. So if you're a smart kid who's academically inclined, then I would say pursue that curiosity and that interest and that instinct and don't lose touch with the people around you. Maybe you feel isolated in some ways or you feel different somehow, but a lot of those people have something to teach you, even if you might be more book smart than them. So stay connected and stay grounded. And learn to look outward and basically understand that if you're bright enough to go off to college and interact with different kinds of people, they're going to hold very different views from you. Be open-minded and take that in. But also remember, there's often a chasm between your lofty intentions and the practical outcome of whatever actions you choose to take or whatever policy you choose to support. So be aware and understand that good feelings don't necessarily lead to good outcomes.
: Oh man, this could be like a whole hour of its own. One piece of advice for them is to understand that the world is vying for your attention. Everywhere you turn, someone's trying to sell you something or capture you or get you hooked on something. So be aware of that. Spend more time focusing on yourself, on self-improvement, on learning about yourself, about the world, about other people. The advice is hard to give, it's hard to give blanket advice that's universally applicable because not every kid is as bright as someone like JD Vance. A lot of the guys who grew up withare very capable in many ways, but not all of them, even in kind of optimal circumstances, not all of them were going to go to Yale Law School. So if you're a smart kid who's academically inclined, then I would say pursue that curiosity and that interest and that instinct and don't lose touch with the people around you. Maybe you feel isolated in some ways or you feel different somehow, but a lot of those people have something to teach you, even if you might be more book smart than them. So stay connected and stay grounded. And learn to look outward and basically understand that if you're bright enough to go off to college and interact with different kinds of people, they're going to hold very different views from you. Be open-minded and take that in. But also remember, there's often a chasm between your lofty intentions and the practical outcome of whatever actions you choose to take or whatever policy you choose to support. So be aware and understand that good feelings don't necessarily lead to good outcomes.
Yuri Bezmenov: I think you focus a lot on what the individual has the power to do, but is there somewhat of a role of society to play, especially for people who are growing up in rougher circumstances? For example, when did you realize that you had what it took to go into the Air Force and go around the world, go to Yale, Cambridge, and all that? Did someone tell you or did you have an inkling and figure it out because you were born curious?
: I think you focus a lot on what the individual has the power to do, but is there somewhat of a role of society to play, especially for people who are growing up in rougher circumstances? For example, when did you realize that you had what it took to go into the Air Force and go around the world, go to Yale, Cambridge, and all that? Did someone tell you or did you have an inkling and figure it out because you were born curious?
Dr. Rob Henderson: You know, it was a mixture of things. I barely graduated from high school. By that point, senior year, there were a couple of different older kind of quasi-role models in my life. One was a high school history teacher and the other was my friend's dad. Both of them had been in the Air Force and they recommended it to me. I took the ASVAB, the Armed Services Vocational Aptitude Battery, which is a standardized test, essentially. It correlates fairly highly with the SAT and taps into the same skillsreading, writing, basic numeracy and literacy and some other skills as well. I took that test and scored very highly on it. That was one of the first times, when my recruiter was walking me through my results, I realized, "Oh, that's a really high score. I could have gone off to college right out of high school had I actually applied myself."
: You know, it was a mixture of things. I barely graduated from high school. By that point, senior year, there were a couple of different older kind of quasi-role models in my life. One was a high school history teacher and the other was my friend's dad. Both of them had been in the Air Force and they recommended it to me. I took the ASVAB, the Armed Services Vocational Aptitude Battery, which is a standardized test, essentially. It correlates fairly highly with the SAT and taps into the same skillsreading, writing, basic numeracy and literacy and some other skills as well. I took that test and scored very highly on it. That was one of the first times, when my recruiter was walking me through my results, I realized, "Oh, that's a really high score. I could have gone off to college right out of high school had I actually applied myself."
Yuri Bezmenov: Were you surprised by scoring so high?
: Were you surprised by scoring so high?
Dr. Rob Henderson: As high as I did, yeah. I didn't expect to score low. I knew I wasn't dumb, but I never thought of myself as smart. The power of standardized testing.
: As high as I did, yeah. I didn't expect to score low. I knew I wasn't dumb, but I never thought of myself as smart. The power of standardized testing.
Yuri Bezmenov: Exactly.
: Exactly.
Dr. Rob Henderson: Yeah, I've defended standardized testing in multiple different essays and mediums. In my case, my grades were bad because I was just a reckless, aimless kid who, you know, a lot of my... everything I did was basically my fault. I had a rough upbringing and everything, but the choices I made in high school were my own. You could draw a maximally sympathetic character here of a girl in high school who has maybe poor parents or her single mom she's raised by is checked out and on drugs. This girl has to go to work a minimum wage job and help take care of her siblings. Her time is stretched very thin so she's not necessarily in a position to give 100% of her effort to every single class she's taking and get straight A's to go to college. But if she can set an afternoon aside and take the SAT and get a high score, then that can reveal information about her to a college admissions committee. They know something about her: she has mitigating circumstances, these factors in her personal life that prevented her from doing well in school. But she's obviously a talented girl. So they can let her in or whatever. But the whole idea to abolish the SATanother luxury beliefbecause there was a study out of Stanford a couple of years ago which found that the content of a personal essay for a college application correlates more highly with family income than the SAT does. These researchers coded these essays and found that the types of essays that tend to be accepted by admissions committees contain a lot of words about travel and volunteering and vague allusions to family wealth. If you're a poor kid, you're not going to write an essay like that, but you can set an afternoon aside, get some test prep books from your library or go to Khan Academy online and do some test prep yourself and have a better chance of getting in. So the whole idea that we should eliminate that was so silly. I'm glad that most, if not all, of these elite schools are at least reinstating that. So I guess that is one good sign.
: Yeah, I've defended standardized testing in multiple different essays and mediums. In my case, my grades were bad because I was just a reckless, aimless kid who, you know, a lot of my... everything I did was basically my fault. I had a rough upbringing and everything, but the choices I made in high school were my own. You could draw a maximally sympathetic character here of a girl in high school who has maybe poor parents or her single mom she's raised by is checked out and on drugs. This girl has to go to work a minimum wage job and help take care of her siblings. Her time is stretched very thin so she's not necessarily in a position to give 100% of her effort to every single class she's taking and get straight A's to go to college. But if she can set an afternoon aside and take the SAT and get a high score, then that can reveal information about her to a college admissions committee. They know something about her: she has mitigating circumstances, these factors in her personal life that prevented her from doing well in school. But she's obviously a talented girl. So they can let her in or whatever. But the whole idea to abolish the SATanother luxury beliefbecause there was a study out of Stanford a couple of years ago which found that the content of a personal essay for a college application correlates more highly with family income than the SAT does. These researchers coded these essays and found that the types of essays that tend to be accepted by admissions committees contain a lot of words about travel and volunteering and vague allusions to family wealth. If you're a poor kid, you're not going to write an essay like that, but you can set an afternoon aside, get some test prep books from your library or go to Khan Academy online and do some test prep yourself and have a better chance of getting in. So the whole idea that we should eliminate that was so silly. I'm glad that most, if not all, of these elite schools are at least reinstating that. So I guess that is one good sign.
Yuri Bezmenov: Fantastic. Well, Rob, thanks again for joining. Your path from military to Yale and now a movie about your bestselling bookwe will continue to follow this with great interest because we just mentioned somebody who had that path and is now on to quite a job in a few months. Enjoy your travels. We'll see you on Substack and back in the city.
: Fantastic. Well, Rob, thanks again for joining. Your path from military to Yale and now a movie about your bestselling bookwe will continue to follow this with great interest because we just mentioned somebody who had that path and is now on to quite a job in a few months. Enjoy your travels. We'll see you on Substack and back in the city.
Dr. Rob Henderson: All right. Sounds good, Yuri. Thank you.
: All right. Sounds good, Yuri. Thank you.
Yuri Bezmenov: All right. Take care. Bye.
: All right. Take care. Bye.
Comments
Restacks
Yuri Bezmenov
Yuri Bezmenov

How To Subvert Subversion with
How To Subvert Subversion with
How To Subvert Subversion with
Jan 3
Fantastic struggle session, Rob. Great to host a kindred spirit.
Fantastic struggle session, Rob. Great to host a kindred spirit.
Like (4)
Reply
Share
Kathleen Allen
Kathleen Allen
Kathleens Substack
Kathleens Substack
Kathleens Substack
Jan 3
I smiled at your comments about how people dressed at Yale. I got my first real taste of class differences, not at Yale, but when I was a freshman at Ohio State in 1968.  I had to work for a year before I could afford the very reasonable tuition at the time. I came back to the dorm after Christmas break proud of the stylish coat that my mother somehow managed to get me, the oldest of 7 kids, for Christmas. I commented to one of my roommates, Oh, you got a coat like mine! The coat was the same color and style. She huffed, Mines cashmere!  I didnt even know what cashmere was. She was from a higher class.  Her father was an orthodontist!
I smiled at your comments about how people dressed at Yale. I got my first real taste of class differences, not at Yale, but when I was a freshman at Ohio State in 1968.  I had to work for a year before I could afford the very reasonable tuition at the time. I came back to the dorm after Christmas break proud of the stylish coat that my mother somehow managed to get me, the oldest of 7 kids, for Christmas. I commented to one of my roommates, Oh, you got a coat like mine! The coat was the same color and style. She huffed, Mines cashmere!  I didnt even know what cashmere was. She was from a higher class.  Her father was an orthodontist!
Like (3)
Reply
Share
Top
Latest
Discussions

Rob Henderson

Rob Henderson

Rob Henderson

Rob Henderson

Rob Henderson

Rob Henderson

Rob Henderson

Rob Henderson

Rob Henderson

Rob Henderson


undefined subscriptions will be displayed on your profile (edit)
Skip for now
For your security, we need to re-authenticate you.
Click the link we sent to sasha.p.podolsky@gmail.com, orclick here to sign in.