

1
Book meeting
Book a meeting
Below is the first chapter of my forthcoming book.
In case you missed it,hereis the preface. As a premium subscriber, you get to start readingTroubled: A Memoir of Foster Care, Family, and Social Class7 months before everyone else.
In case you missed it,
is the preface. As a premium subscriber, you get to start reading
I figured Id outline a few reasons why Im sharing installments ofmy memoirwith you here before the date of publication (February 20, 2024).
I figured Id outline a few reasons why Im sharing installments of
with you here before the date of publication (February 20, 2024).

First, theres the very real possibility of censorship. You might be familiar with the recent and surreal cases of publishers tampering with books (e.g., Roald Dahl). Theres this stunningstoryof author R.L. Stine (ofGoosebumpsfame) discovering that his publisher was censoring and rewriting parts of his books without his knowledge for political reasons.
First, theres the very real possibility of censorship. You might be familiar with the recent and surreal cases of publishers tampering with books (e.g., Roald Dahl). Theres this stunning
of author R.L. Stine (of
I doubt this will happen tomy book. But these days, who the hell knows.
I doubt this will happen to
. But these days, who the hell knows.
Ten years ago, it would have been unthinkable for a mainstream publisher in the United States of America to interfere with already published books without author permission in order to advance a political agenda. Lots of things were unthinkable ten years ago. My book contains violence, drug use, and casual homophobia. The words retard and fag appear multiple times. Nowadays, its probably less problematic for a 9-year-old to smoke Marlboro Reds and chug tequila (as I did) than to call people retarded or gay as an insult.
So Im sharing my book here, as a sort of backup.
Second, I like the idea of posting the book in installments alongside the binge-able official version that will later be available. As Erik Hoel has pointed out, People dont wake up and pick up a book; they wake up and pick up their phones...people will, if given the opportunity, read a 5,000-word essay on their phone with their head still on the pillow. In those cases, its not terrible; its wonderful."
Third, Im releasing these chapter installments before the official book release date as a gesture of appreciation for your support as a premium subscriber.
Finally, when the time comes, Ill ask you to write a brief review. The idea is that, on the official launch date, you will have a ready-made review that you can then post on Amazon or Goodreads. No need to worry about this for now, though.
My book can be read in a variety of ways. A glimpse into what its like to grow up in foster homes, squalor, and poverty. An exploration of social class in America. A journey of upward social mobility. A decoder ring for understanding how elites think and operate. Or just a unique and (hopefully) compelling story. Going through it again, I notice I inadvertently wrote the early chapters as a love letter of sorts to the era of my childhood and youth. That not too distant past spanning the nineties to the early 2000s.Re-reading it, I also noticed some subtext and indirect allusions and buried symbolism. This was unintentional; unconsciously expressed through the process of writing. Most of the story, though, exists above the water line, with fragments submerged beneath.
Pre-Order My Book
Pre-Order My Book
"Troubledresonated with me because, as a product of a single mother raised in public housing, I see so much of my story in Rob's insightful book. As you see the world through Rob's eyes, you won't be able to pull your eyes off the page. But I'm warning you; you may shed a few tears."
"Troubledresonated with me because, as a product of a single mother raised in public housing, I see so much of my story in Rob's insightful book. As you see the world through Rob's eyes, you won't be able to pull your eyes off the page. But I'm warning you; you may shed a few tears."
Ed Latimore, professional boxer, public speaker, author ofHard Lessons From the Hurt Business
Chapter One
I graduated with a BS in psychology from Yale University on May 21, 2018. Shortly before the commencement ceremony, I walked through the idyllic campus one last time with my sister.A friend from class loudly called my name as we passed. He and his boyfriend joined us, saying they needed a short break from their families. My sister snapped photos of the Gothic architecture for her Instagram story.
My friend grinned and wrapped his arm across my shoulder, whispering So who is she? and tilting his head toward Hannah.
Matthew, I replied,thats my sister. What? You guys dont really look alike.
Im adopted. Ive told you this. Matthew was right.Although my adoptive sister and I share a similar ethnic backgroundboth of us are half Koreanthere isnt much of a resemblance.
Oh, right. Wow.Yale and now Cambridge. And youre like the only foster kid I know. Dude, your family won the adoption lottery!
I laughed with him.Yeah, maybe they did.
If you ask most people to recall their earliest memory, its usually from when they were around age three. Here is mine.
Its completely dark. I am gripping my mothers lap. Burying my face so deeply into her stomach I cant breathe. I come up for air and see two police officers looming over us. I know they want to take my mom away, but Im scared and dont want to let her go. I fasten myself to her as hard as I can.
My internal alarms are going off and Im sobbing. I want the strange men in black clothes to leave.
The memory picks up, like a dream, in a long white hallway with my mother. Im sitting on a bench next to her drinking chocolate milk. My three-year-old legs dangle above the floor. I sneeze and spill my chocolate milk. I look to my mom for help, but she cant move her arms. Shes wearing handcuffs.
My mother came to the United States from Seoul, South Korea. Her father, my grandfather, was a former police detective who had grown wealthy after starting a fertilizer company. My mother moved to California as a young woman and completed one semester of college before dropping out.Her parents supported her while she studied.After I was removed from her care, she was asked by a forensic psychologist if she had taken drugs in college. She replied, It was a psychedelic age.Several years after arriving in the US, she met my father, and became pregnant with me.As an adult, I took a DNA test that revealed that my father was Hispanic, with ancestry from Mexico and Spain. He abandoned my mother shortly after her pregnancy, and I have no memories of him.According to the social worker responsible for my case, my mother had two sons with two other men before becoming pregnant with me. Ive never met my half-brothers. Ive never tried or wanted to. From a young age, I wanted to distance myself from any reminder of my origins.
When I was a baby, my mother and I lived in a car.About a year later, we moved into a slum apartment in Westlake, a poor neighbor-hood in Los Angeles. Documents from social workers report that my mother would tie me to a chair with a bathrobe belt so that she could get high in another room without being interrupted. She left bruises and marks on my face. While my mother did drugs, I would cry from the other room as I struggled to break free.
Eventually, after many instances of this, neighbors in the apartment complex overheard my screams.They called the police. Later, I obtained a report from a Los Angeles County forensic psychologist:
I have received reports from her apartment manager that she has been associating with known drug users.There have been many people, mostly men, in and out of her room at all hours, and allegations that she is exchanging sexual favors for drugs. She denies these accusations.
In view of the above, I cannot recommend she have custody of her son at this time.While I do not doubt her love for her son, the atmosphere in which she has chosen to live is not conducive to child-rearing. Furthermore, she may soon be homeless again.
After her arrest, my mother was deported to South Korea. I never saw her again. Its funny, many non-adopted people have asked me if Ive tried to find her, and when I say I havent, they often react with surprise. But other adopted people seldom ask me about whether Ive tried to find my birth parents, and when they do, theyre never surprised when I say I havent.Why try to find some-one who did not want you in their life?
No father, no mother. I was three years old when I entered the Los Angeles County foster care system.
One in five foster kids are placed in five or more homes through-out their time in the system.Three-quarters of foster kids spend at least two years in foster care.Thirty-three percent stay five or more years. One in four are adopted.The median age for leaving foster care is seven years old. I am a data point for each of these statistics. I am often asked why foster kids are moved into so many different homes, even when things are going relatively well. One reason is that, oftentimes, a birth parent or family member will later become available to care for the kid. But if the child has grown too attached to their foster parents, this can create problems. So, kids preemptively get shuffled around so that they dont get too attached to any one particular home. But there are plenty of kids like me, with no possibility of being taken in by a family member, whom this strategy needlessly deprives of stability.
According to documents from my social workers, I lived in seven different foster homes in Los Angeles in total. In two of the placements, my stays were briefless than a monthand nothing noteworthy occurred. In two others, I cant report what happened because, to my dismay, I simply cant remember. Its possible that these experiences were so upsetting that the memories werent encoded. Its also conceivable that I stayed in these homes for such a short amount of time that my recollections of them blended with the placements I do rememberthis is what I hope occurred. I have substantive memories of three of my foster homes.
After I was taken from my mother, there was a blur of different adults buzzing around me. I felt confused and terrified. On the way to my first home, still distressed over my separation from my mother, I vibrated in my car seat as my social worker drove. Eventually I fell asleep from physical and emotional exhaustion and woke up in a foster home.
It was a small and crowded duplex.There were seven kids in my new home, mostly Black and Hispanic, plus one white kid. Race wasnt a big deal in any of my homes, though. Size was more important.An older kid, around twelve years old, was the ringleader. He controlled the television channel with the threat of violence if any of us tried to watch what we wanted.We spent most of our time watching TV, roughhousing without much adult supervision, and scrounging around for food.MTV was usually on in the back-ground, and it seemed like Waterfalls by TLC played every day.
Pre-Order My Book
Pre-Order My Book
After a few months of this, I got used to living there. One day, I was playing with the other kids under a table, pretending to be a dinosaur. Suddenly, an adult trespassed on our fantasy. This was rare. Typically, the adults in this home left us alone, except to feed and bathe us. I reluctantly peered out from under the table. A Black woman knelt down and said it was time for us to go. I recognized her as Gerri, the woman who first drove me here to my new home. Instinctively, I knew she was taking me somewhere else, and I would not return. Some part of me suspected that my arrangement was not meant to last. Even at four years old, I remember being confused that the people on screen had different kinds of families than we did.The TV families were all the same.The kids always lived with the same parents; they never had to live with others. Id also seen some of my foster siblings leave, and new ones had come to join us.
Gerri repeated that it was time to go. I started crying. The kind of crying where kids lose control of their bodies and forget how to breathe. I gripped one of the table legs, refusing to let go. My foster parents told me it was okay, that I would join a new foster family.Their words werent registering. I didnt want a new family; I wanted to stay with what was familiar.
They were the only parents I had really known, even though I barely saw them. I had no idea where I was going next. I bawled the entire way to the new foster home. And when we arrived, I clutched Gerri, unwilling to let go of her leg. She was my new anchor. She was the only familiar thing in this strange new home, full of strange children and adults speaking a language I couldnt understand.The house was located in West Covina, a working-class area of LA County composed mostly of Hispanic and Asian families. I didnt eat much for my first couple of days.Anytime my new foster parents, the Dela Peas, tried to feed me, Id push the food away, saying I had a stomachache. I did, from the distress of being taken from my previous foster placement. But I was also, without realizing it, on a hunger strike. I thought if I didnt eat for long enough, maybe Gerri would reappear and I could ask her to take me back to my last home. She didnt, and eventually my appetite returned.
My new foster parents were from the Philippines. The dad spoke English well, but he was rarely home. Mrs. Dela Pea had some challenges with English, which created challenges for me.This was the first home I was at when I started attending school. On my first day at school,I stood in the lunch line.The lunch lady asked me for my lunch card. I didnt have one. She gave me a form and said I couldnt have lunch until it was signed.
I brought this form to Mrs. Dela Pea. She glanced at the form and said I should get free lunches without her having to pay. She thought the form required payment, when it was simply to register me into the free lunch system, so she ignored it. I didnt understand the mix-up at the time and just figured I wouldnt be able to eat lunch at school. I was hungry a lot.
I went through the lunch line each day, hoping maybe Id magically be registered in the system. Sometimes Id fantasize about sneaking through to get some chicken nuggets or a slice of pizza. Each day, the lunch lady would apologize and ask for the form. So, Id sit and watch other kids eat lunch.At first, I didnt think it was a big deal. But slowly, I realized other kids thought it was weird that I didnt have anything to eat. My classmate Anthony brought lunches his mom packed. He would sometimes give me half of his bologna sandwich.Once, a kid asked him if he could trade his sandwich for some chips.Anthony said no because he was going to give me half his sandwich.
Why are you giving Robert half? Lets just trade. I dont like Fritos.
Nah, I cant, Anthony said, tilting his head toward me.He aint got no lunch.This kid Anthony also let me use his coloring pencils and would invite me to his house to watch cartoons.
One day, as I stood in line, the lunch lady smiled.
I have a surprise for you, she said. She pulled out a lunch card and handed it to me, instantly becoming my favorite person in the school.I made sure to thank her each time I went through the line. I never did learn how she managed to do this for me. I was an un-sophisticated little kid, just grateful to be able to eat like everyone else. I felt like less of an outsider.And it was easier to pay attention in class when I wasnt so hungry.
Food was sometimes hard to come by in my foster home.There were my five or six foster siblings, plus members of my foster par-ents extended family, many of whom were teenage boys.They often plowed through most of the food before the younger foster kids had a chance to eat anything. One of my foster brothers and I would sometimes conspire to sneak snacks from the pantry. One day I came home from school, and he was gone.
His mommy took him home, Robert, Mrs. Dela Pea ex-plained.
Okay, I said. I wanted to ask if that would ever happen to me. But I hoped it wouldnt, and I was afraid asking might make it come true.
An older man, Mrs. Dela Peas father, lived in the home as well.He was nice to me.He would spend weekends in the kitchen, cooking chicken. I always offered to help, and he gave me portions of the food. I loved this chicken, especially the legs. I spent a lot of time hanging around the old man, even though we couldnt communicate because of the language barrier. Like me, he was mostly ignored in the house.
Although the everyday experiences of my foster siblings and I were already confusing, I suspect a coincidence in the mid-nineties made it an especially perplexing period for any five-year-old. I would hear Simpson on the television in the living room.So, the other kids and I would think it was The Simpsons cartoon and get excited. But then wed see it was just the news talking about a guy in a courtroom, and wed walk away disappointed.
A few weeks after he left, my foster brother returned to live with us. He said his mom got into trouble again. I was so glad he was back and gave him half of a stale Zebra Cake I had hidden under my bed. I would sometimes wonder if, like my foster brother, my mom would ever come back for me. It didnt even occur to me that my father might, because I had never known him. Later, Id realize how lucky I was that my mom had moved back to South Korea and didnt know who my dad was. I did not have to experience the revolving door of toxic biological parents continually entering and exiting my life the way so many of my foster siblings did.
There were a lot of teenage boys in this home.Some were relatives and nephews of my foster parents, who spoke Tagalog as well as English, and others were older foster boys.
They usually hung out in the garage, drinking and smoking. They played music videos on MTV or listened to the radio. The music was so loud that sometimes it physically reverberated throughout the house. I heard songs like Gangsters Paradise by Coolio and Tha Crossroads by Bone Thugs-N-Harmony.
One day I wandered into the garage. The music video for Keep Their Heads Ringin by Dr. Dre was playing on the TV. Whenever I walked in, the boys usually ignored me. I saw a small glass with a golden-brown liquid on a table. It looked like apple juice. I grabbed it and took a sip. It tasted awful. I spilled the glass, which got the guys attention.They laughed and asked what I was doing.
I wanted juice, I said.
Yo, I got you, one of the guys said. He muted the TV and pressed some buttons on a boombox radio. Gin and Juice by Snoop Dogg played.
Another guy popped the tab of a soda can and handed it to me. Here, try this, he said.
I smelled it. It wasnt soda. Its beer, give it a try.
I took a small sip. It tasted bad. I made a face and ran off when they started laughing.
One boy in the house was my foster parents birth son. He was the cousin of the guys in the garage and was a little older than me. I told him what had just happened.
I asked them to try beer once and they tickled me until I ran away.They said my mom would get mad, he said. I figured this meant the guys liked me, and that made me want to get their approval.
I came back and tried their beer again.They all looked at me, waiting to see what would happen. I took a sip and started coughing. Its okay, youll get the hang of it, one of them said, smirking as he grabbed the can from me and took a swig.
They taught me some swear wordsmy favorite was mother-fucker because it was the word my teacher reacted to the most when I said it.
Some of them had tattoos. I announced that I wanted to get lots of them when I had big muscles like them.
Isnt that how Angel got caught? one said.
Yeah, man, said another.Tattoos make it easier for the cops to catch you.
Why? I asked.
They learn what tattoos you have, so they know who you are and that makes it easier to find you.
That made sense. I still wanted one, but not as much anymore. One of my older foster brothers told me why he moved in with us. He said his mom had gone off for several days on a bender, getting high with one of her boyfriends. He was twelve years old and left to fend for himself.A teacher discovered that hed been living alone and reported it to the authorities.They placed him with us. Later, he and some other kids at their middle school lured a boy into a hallway and stabbed him to death. I didnt see my foster brother after that. I asked my older foster sister what had happened to him, because nobody mentioned why he had suddenly vanished. She paused, and then said that he had gone off to juvie. I sort of knew what juvie was. It was where the bad kids went. I asked if wed ever see him again. She replied that she didnt know, but a few weeks later she said that he had hanged himself.That was the first time Id learned about suicide.
Months later, Gerri, my social worker, came to the house. It was time for me to go live somewhere else, she said. Id just turned seven, and this time I didnt cry. I was dejected, but the tears didnt come. Id learned to shut down, sealing myself off from my emotions. Gerri helped me gather my clothes and put them into a black garbage bag. She picked up a shoe box next to my bed, and a bunch of cards fell out.
What are these, Robert? she asked.
I picked up a Sonic the Hedgehog card, not responding. These are from Valentines Day? she asked, flipping through them.
Yeah, kids in class gave one to everyone, and I play with them. I swung the Sonic card around to show Gerri how fast he was.
We packed up and walked out to her car. I wondered if this was how the rest of my life would be: moving to a home, staying for a while, and Gerri putting me somewhere else. By this point I knew that other kids didnt have to do this.
No matter which foster home I lived in, Gerri visited to check in on me every few weeks, which to me indicated that she cared about me, and each time she would take me to lunch.At the time, I thought Gerris favorite place to eat was In-N-Out Burger because thats where we would always go, but its also likely she went there because she was always busy with her social worker caseload. Her visits were the only time I ate fast food, which I always looked forward to. By this point, I felt great affection for Gerri, and I hoped she felt the same way about me. She was the only stable, familiar adult figure in my life. My appreciation for Gerri and the restaurant became intertwined.To this day, when I walk into an In-N-Out, I feel a pleasant sense of nostalgiaof serenity. Its still my favorite restaurant.
After our pit stop at In-N-Out, Gerri took me to my next foster home, in a town in the San Gabriel Valley.This new foster home was in a neighborhood that was a little more run-down than the one I lived in before.The houses were closer together, the yards more unkempt, the cars older.
Still, the house seemed big because there were no other kids living in it.I peered around as Gerri and my new foster mom,Mrs. Martnez, spoke with each other. I dropped my bag of clothes and wandered into the hallway.
Not too far, Robert, Gerri said.
The house was nicer on the inside than the outside.The kitchen was pretty small, but there were three bedrooms and a tube TV in the living room. Everything was clean.This was because, again, there were no other kids here. I had mixed feelings about this. I liked having other kids around to play with. But I was happy to not have to fight with other kids over food or what TV shows to watch. I wondered aloud why the Martnezes, my new foster family, didnt have more kids living with them.
We like things quiet, Mr. Martnez said.We like things clean. The adults smiled knowingly. I didnt realize it yet, but the Martnezes took young foster boys because we were ideal for performing chores.
We only need one kid, Mrs. Martnez told me. She and Gerri went on to say that Id have plenty of time with other kids in school, and there were lots of kids on the block.
This created opportunities for trouble.
There was this kid who lived on my street named Jason. He was a big kid, or at least bigger than me. One day I was roller-skating by his house and he started calling me names.The roller skates belonged to Mrs. Martnezs adult son from back when he was a little older than I was at this point (seven), so they were too big for me. It was tricky to keep my balance. I returned the favor to Jason and called him names as I skated by. Suddenly he started chasing me. I rolled fast but tripped over a garden hose on the sidewalk and he caught up to me. He kicked me in the face a few times as I struggled to get up. It turns out dodging kicks to the head while trying to stand up on oversized roller skates is not easy. I kept slipping back down, catching more kicks. I managed to kick him once as hard as I could in the shin with my roller skates, putting an end to things.
I staggered up, wiping my face with my arm. I saw my blood smeared across my sleeve and panicked. I sat down on the edge of the sidewalk in front of the Martnez house, tears running down my face.A few minutes later, a girl named Rosa who lived next door saw me. She yelled for her parents, and they helped me clean up. They asked me why I didnt go to my foster mother, Mrs. Martnez, for help. It was a confusing question. It hadnt occurred to me to ask her for help. I was actually thinking of ways to hide my wounds from her. I dreaded asking Mrs. Martnez for anything. I didnt trust her.
The reason was because of an incident that occurred about two weeks after Id been placed in the home. The Martnezes had a swimming pool in their backyard. I still remember my excitement when I learned about this. Unfortunately, most of my pool time was limited to cleaning and maintaining it. I was a seven-year-old pool boy. One afternoon, after a long day of school and chores, Mrs. Martnez said I could spend five minutes in the pool. I was thrilled. I didnt know how to swim, but I decided to spend the few minutes trying to learn. Mrs. Martnez told me to stay on one specific end of the pool, without explaining why.
I splashed around with my legs planted to the bottom of the pool, and then decided to venture to the other end, not knowing that it was the deep end. I grabbed the wall of the swimming pool, edging along to the other side, and then pushed off and tried to do what Id been doing in the shallow end. Suddenly, I realized I couldnt feel the bottom of the pool with my feet. I didnt know that pools had shallow ends and deep ends. I panicked, swallowing mouthfuls of water as I gasped for air.Through splashes, I saw Mrs. Martnez talking on the phone, standing at the edge of the pool. She furrowed her brows at me and walked away.
As I continued kicking my feet and reaching for the edge of the pool, my arms grew weary. I screamed for help. Mrs. Martnez reappeared. She held out an extendable pool net. I grabbed onto the net while she pulled me to the edge, phone still tucked between her shoulder and her ear. I climbed up, sobbing. She walked inside the house and closed the door without saying a word to me.I stood outside, stunned, rubbing my eyes and heaving from the chlorinated water Id swallowed. Later, I told Mrs. Martnez my stomach hurt from swallowing the pool water. She replied,You see? Listen to me. Stay on that side of the pool. Next time Ill drop the net and you can drink up the whole pool!
Mrs. Martnez never laid a hand on me. I would come to learn that she was well-practiced in designing creative and cruel punishments.
I had a friend named Julian who lived down the block. He had cable, unlike the Martnezes, so wed sometimes watch cartoons together. My favorite was Doug on Nickelodeon, especially the Quail Man episodes. Doug would daydream of being a tough superhero, which I also did.Wed listen to music, too, blaring No Diggity by Blackstreet or whatever else was on the radio. I hung out with Julian and other friends as often as I could to avoid Mrs. Martnez. But after the roller-skate fight, Mrs. Martnez said I couldnt go to my friends houses anymore. Id told Rosas parents that I was scared to tell Mrs. Martnez about Jason injuring me.They relayed this to Mrs. Martnez, which spooked her. She was afraid Id tell other par-ents about how she treated me.
One day I was outside pulling weeds in the front yard. Julians stepdad was walking their family dog. He stopped and said,Hey, Robert, nice job there, pointing his chin toward the pile of weeds. You havent visited in a while, and I know Julian would like to see you.
Mrs. Martnez stepped outside, smiling and waving. Julians stepdad continued on his walk. I wondered whether he could detect the menace beneath Mrs. Martnezs pleasant exterior. I had a strange feeling just then. It was familiar, but it hit me that time in a way that I was able to consciously realize for the first time: Im all alone out here.The feeling of utter isolation just washed over me. Mrs. Martnez said I wasnt allowed to see Julian for a while, and whenever I asked when I could hang out with him again, she always replied soon. Eventually, just as I was about to give up asking, she let me visit his house again.
One night I heard Mrs. Martnezs adult daughter, who sometimes stayed over, on the phone saying,No, she doesnt take teenagers. She prefers young boys. I eavesdropped as I mopped the hallways, thinking that I might be getting a new foster brother. I missed hav-ing foster siblings to talk to. But on the bright side, I also realized that I didnt have to see any of my foster siblings leave for new homes anymore.And I wouldnt miss any of them when Id eventually have to go to another home. Saying good-bye got easier each time, but it still hurt.
Mrs. Martnez was controlling and severe. It didnt surprise me that she didnt take older boys who might be tempted to rebel. She had a routine for me. I spent a lot of time doing chores around the house.There were two dogs I had to feed every morning and evening. I took out the trash and put the bins at the curbside once a week. I cleaned the pool and swept the patio. Later, confirm-ing my hunch that she was an eccentric woman, Mrs. Martnez bought a parrot, which she named Carlos but insisted I refer to as Mr. Carlos. Sometimes I would purposely call him Carlos just to upset Mrs. Martnez. I was scared of this bird but still had to feed him.And as long as I did my chores, Mrs. Martnez didnt seem to care if I got into trouble at school.
One day a psychologist came to visit the foster home to give me a few tests, I guess because I was doing so badly in school. She asked me if I wanted Mrs.Martnez to stay in the room or not.I said I wanted her to stay because I was wary of strangers. Really, though, both adults were strangers to me. But I wanted the adult I knew for ten weeks to stay because she was more familiar to me than the adult I had only known for ten minutes. I was a kid surrounded by strangers who thought that maybe I had a learning disability or some condition that inhibited my academic progress. I dont know if theyd considered that never having had a family and moving all the time was a big part of why I wasnt doing well. Placing a label on my poor academic performance would have helped to absolve adults of responsibility, I guess.The psychologist showed me pictures and asked me to describe them.
This is a man combing his hair, I said.
She paused and asked if I noticed anything unusual about the image.The man in the picture was bald. He was combing air over his hairless head. I knew she wanted me to say yes, there was some-thing odd about this picture. I said no.
After a few more questions, she asked if I knew what parrot meant. I said no. Mrs. Martnez glared at me. I glared at the psychologist. Who is this person? I thought to myself. Another adult with a sing-songy voice trying to be nice to me while know-ing neither of us was ever going to see the other again. The psychologist asked what grade I was in. I said second grade. She asked if I remembered any of my first-grade teachers names. I said no. She asked if I remembered the names of any of the schools I attended last year. I said no. I made an effort for some of the other questionslike measuring a pencil using a paper ruler.That part was fun. For the easier questions, I gave vague or wrong answers because I knew what she wanted me to say. I was being purposely defiantthis was an outlet for my barely contained anger. Generally, I was either morose, incensed, or just totally emotionally numb at having to move so frequently or from seeing my foster siblings move.After a while, I zoned out. I didnt care about this psychologists questions. I didnt care about school. Adults didnt seem to take my needs seriously. So why, I thought, should I take their tests and questions seriously?
I had been enrolled in six different elementary schools before enter-ing the third grade. One day in second grade I was in the bathroom at school.As I washed my hands, some boys were huddled nearby, snickering.One of them showed me a quarter, which they had apparently picked from my pocket. Sure enough, Id had two quarters, but when I reached into my pocket, I found only one. I chased them out of the bathroom and tackled one.This boy didnt have the quarter, but I grabbed his fingers and twisted them back until he yelped in pain. I got up and kicked him in the head.Another kid ran up behind me and punched me in the back of the neck, making me drop forward.
It was Jasonthe kid who had beaten me up when I was roller-skating. I leapt up and kicked him between the legs.Two of the other boys instantly tackled me and held me down.
Jason limped toward me. He surprised me by saying he was sorry about what hed done. He said his mom had wanted him to come over to apologize, but Mrs. Martnez wouldnt let him see me. Then he shifted gears and said they were planning to steal a purse.
Mrs. Martnez would sometimes say that there were a lot of bad kids in the neighborhood and that she made me do chores so that I would learn discipline and wouldnt have enough time to get into trouble. I couldnt tell if she was sincere or if that was just self-serving reasoningmaybe both. Still, her adult daughter said she avoided driving over alone at night because there were older boys in the neighborhood who shouted at her.
Youre a liar, I said, as the boys let up from holding me down. Dont call me a liar, bitch, Jason said.
I slapped him across the face and tried to kick him again.We resumed fighting while the other boys watched.
He was a big kid, so he got me in a headlock pretty fast. Were gonna nab that fucking purse, he said, squeezing my neck while both of us panted from exhaustion.
Prove it, motherfucker. I tried to bite his arm while struggling to break free.
Come with us, he said, letting me go.
We walked to a classroom, which the boys had noticed earlier was unlocked.We peered inside, and it was empty because of recess. On the teachers desk was a purse. One of Jasons friends grabbed it, and we ran back into the bathroom.We split the money and left the purse there. I hung out with these boys a few more times and learned to pickpocket from them.We taught each other swear words that wed learned; I had a lot from the garage crew in my last foster home.
Two of the kids in my new friend group, Vinnie and Alonzo, were brothers who lived in my neighborhood. I had to cross a street to visit them, which led to a disagreement between Mrs. Martnez and me.
You can only visit those boys if I walk with you there. No crossing any streets unless an adult is there to walk with you, she said firmly.
Why? I can look both ways first, I replied.
Because its dangerous.You could get hit by a car, she said. I dont care if I get hit by a car. I shrugged.
It took five minutes to walk to Vinnie and Alonzos, and I walked there all the time. Mrs. Martnez thought I was at Julians, who lived on the same block as us. Usually, at Vinnie and Alonzos, we played songs on their Walkman (Mo Money Mo Problems by Biggie was a favorite) or watched movies on VHS (Space Jam, Kazaam).The first time I visited their house, I was in the living room with Vinnie and Alonzo. From the window, we saw their mom outside in the street yelling at some other woman who was sitting in the drivers seat of her car drinking a soda. Suddenly, their mom grabbed the driver by her hair and began punching her in the face.Then she grabbed the soda from the womans lap and hit her a few times with it, and shouted,Have a Coke and a smile, bitch!
Dude. I looked over at Alonzo and Vinnie.Your mom is a fucking bad ass, I said.
Yeah, shes tough,Alonzo replied.Used to fight our dad all the time before he left.
Their older sister, who was around nine, walked in and tried to put on The Lion King.
Vinnie threw a Hot Wheels car at her and narrowly missed.Get that bullshit off the TV! he screamed.Alonzo fell over laughing.
Go fuck yourself, Vinnie, his sister replied.
I laughed and grabbed Alonzos Walkman, turning off Going Back to Cali from Biggies new album once the movie started.
One day I skipped one of my chores and walked to Vinnie and Alonzos place instead.Jason met us there, too.We walked to a nearby Kmart snack bar and pickpocketed someones wallet.The first guy caught us and we ran off with nothing. Our next target was oblivious. We took the money and walked to a 7-Eleven to get Slurpees.
Once we got back to Vinnie and Alonzos, their mom noticed we all had blue tongues.
What were you boys doing? their mom asked. Nothing, the two brothers lied.
Robert, can you tell me? she asked. We didnt do anything, I said.
If you dont tell the truth, Robert, Im going to call the Martnezes to see if they know what you kids were up to.
Im not a snitch, I said, grinning at the other boys.
She called Mrs.Martnez and was surprised to learn that I wasnt even allowed to go to their house by myself.Yet I was there most days of the week. She looked distraught when she realized that I was in more trouble than shed anticipated.
As soon as I got home, Mrs. Martnez grabbed her car keys and told me to get in the car.We drove for a while before arriving at an elementary school playground. I began bouncing up and down in my seat from the sugar high.
Good, you have lots of energy.Good.But we will burn it up. Mrs. Martnezs eyes narrowed.
We got out of the car and she told me to follow her.We walked across the street, away from the playground, and toward a high school.We arrived at a quarter-mile athletic track. It was July in the San Fernando Valley.The temperature was over 100 degrees.
She pointed forward.Start running, she commanded. I stood, confused.
Start running!she shouted again. I took off, sprinting at first, then adjusting to a slower jog.
After six or seven laps, I stopped and began heaving. Dont stop, Mrs. Martnez instructed. Youre going to run until your heart explodes.
I began throwing up blue Slurpee and staggered to the ground. Okay, thats enough. She looked around. People were staring at
us. She waved to them and moved to help me up, then kissed the top of my head.We walked to the car and she drove us home in silence.
I didnt pay much attention in class. Learning to write my name, I constantly mixed up the letters, writing the b in my name as a d and sometimes writing the first letter of my name backwards. School was just a place where I went and hung out with other kids. Id go, make some friends, try to sit still in class, and then go to another school a few months later. I didnt really get that I was there to learn. My foster parents also didnt take much interest in whether I was studying or not.They got upset if one of my teachers called them to say Id gotten into another fight or stolen something.When they got these calls, theyd scold me but do little else. Mrs. Martnez only punished me when I did something that personally affected herusually skipping or messing up my chores.
I especially hated reading. One day, my second-grade teacher assigned homework. I skipped the reading and went straight to the questions, hoping to be creative enough to not have to read any-thing. One question contained a word Id never seen before:Citizen. My eyes glided across the C, Z, and N. Sounding out the words, I figured it out: Cousin, I said to myself, proud that I could learn a new word on my own.
The next part of the assignment, as I read it, was,How many cousins live in the US?The answer must have been somewhere in the reading. I didnt want to have to go through all of it. Maybe, I thought, Mrs. Martnez would know. I wandered out of my room and into the kitchen to ask.
Mrs. Martnez, I asked, looking down at my paper. How many cousins live in the US?
She looked blankly at me.What?
How many cousins live in the US? Its for school.
She furrowed her brow.What on earth? Ask your teacher.
I wanted to figure it out on my own. I thought the teacher would tell Mrs. Martnez that I wasnt paying attention in school if I asked, and then theyd send another stupid psychologist to give me another boring test. So, I sat down and went through the reading, trying to understand what I was looking at. I slowly sounded out each letter.Kit . . . i . . . zen, I said.What was that? I didnt know this word. I got irritated as I thought about how other kids would know this word. I didnt understand why other kids knew how to read and I didnt. It came so easily for them, when I could barely write my own name.Why did I have to learn how to read, anyway? A few weeks later, the teacher asked the class what we all wanted
to be when we grew up. I thought about it and replied that I wanted to be a scientist. I watched Bill Nye the Science Guy sometimes on TV and thought it was so cool.
Okay, Robert. But youll have to apply yourself and spend some more time on reading if you want to be a scientist like Bill Nye, the teacher said.
Bill Nye never reads anything, I assured her.
Scientists read all the time, silly. Just because he doesnt read on TV doesnt mean he never reads, she said.
This stunned me. It was the first useful thing I learned in school. You cant know everything about people just by looking at them they have rich and varied lives, much of which is unseen.This revelation, plus my general embarrassment whenever the teacher called on me to read aloud, made me decide to put some effort into reading. The teacher asked if I wanted to borrow some kindergarten-level books. I agreed and quietly put them in my backpack when other kids couldnt see. I didnt want them to make fun of me for being dumb and reading books below our grade level.
I went through these books and practiced a little bit each day. On the weekends, Mrs. Martnez bothered me less when she saw me reading.This meant fewer chores. She liked to keep me busy, unless I had a book in my hands. Sometimes shed even say things like,Thats good, Robert, reading is important. I craved these rare moments of kindness from her, so I kept at it.
Okay, class, today we have some fifth graders who are going to be your reading buddies, said Ms. Sherman.
She explained that each of us second graders would be paired with an older kid and we would take turns reading passages of a book and talking about it. I was paired up with an older Asian kid.
Do you want to go first, or should I go first? he asked. I was nervous. I hated reading aloud.You go first, I said.
He read the first page, a simple story about a rooster. I liked hearing him read it.
So, I think this rooster is trying to find his way back to a farm, what do you think? he said. I blinked at him.
Yeah, okay. I didnt know what else to say. Okay, your turn, he said.
I slowly read my page, tracing my finger along the words. So, what do you think? the fifth grader asked.
Think about what?
What does the story mean? he asked.Like what happened. I dont know. I just read it.
He gave me a confused look. But whats happening in the story?
I must have looked even more confused than him.
I felt embarrassed. I sounded out the words. I hadnt made any mistakes. But I wasnt reading.
I was slowly realizing that reading wasnt just about mouthing the sounds of letters or knowing what each word meant individually.The words taken together were meant to tell a story.I had some dim understanding of this when I would listen to people read at school (no one read to me at home), but it didnt really click that this was what I was supposed to be doing when I read.
I kept practicing on my own until reading finally made sense. I was reading a book I had practiced with before, for several days in a row, when something clicked. I suddenly understood not only each word, but also grasped the meaning of each sentence and could follow the overall story. It felt like magic. Reading the words projected coherent images and stories in my mind.
This was a milestone in my life. From then on, reading became a source of comfort for me. I began reading books all the time, and the teacher let me borrow whatever I wanted, but I still seldom paid attention in school. I read in class instead of doing whatever assignment or activity we were supposed to be doing. Reading was an escape from my memories, from my foster families, from my feelings.
Adults forget how they processed time as children.When youre a grown-up, time flies by.As a kid, the period between the beginning of a school year in September and winter break in December feels endless. I lived in foster homes for just shy of five years, but it felt like twenty.
If I had to reduce what I felt during these early childhood years to a single word, the only one I can think of is: dread. Dread of being caught stealing, dread of punishment, dread of suddenly being moved somewhere else, dread of one of my foster siblings being taken away. Early on, the dread was sharpId see an unfa-miliar car outside or a puzzled look on a foster parents face and begin to panic.The feeling would strike suddenly and then wane. Gradually, it became blunted and ever-present. Sometimes, the sharp dread would return when I was sleeping. Id suddenly wake up in the middle of the night and my heart would be pounding so loudly I would wonder if other people in the house could hear it. I was often sleep deprived at the Martnez house, and I couldnt wait to leave.
TV was another way to temporarily escape my current reality and spend time in another one. Id watch at my friends houses and loved cartoons in particular because the characters were always so upbeat even when they faced big obstacles. Mostly, I was just grateful to spend time in front of the screen and away from Mrs. Martnez.
One day Mrs. Martnez told me she wanted to show me a video. I was surprised because she had never offered to show me a video before.After watching the first minute, I was disappointed. It was a video of real-life people, not cartoons.The video starred a man, a woman, and a little girl. But then they all said,Hi, Robert! which startled me. I was mystified: Sometimes I wondered whether people we watched on TV also watched us, and this seemed to suggest that they did.The man bounced a beach ball on the little girls head while the woman gave a little tour of their home.They seemed very nice. I hoped they could see through the TV how much I enjoyed watching them.
Mrs. Martnez turned to me and said impassively,This is the Henderson family.These are going to be your new parents.
I was confused. I had never seen a video of the family before I moved to a new home.
Why did they make this movie? I asked.
Its not a movie. Its just a home video they made.They want to adopt you.
What does that mean? I asked.
It means theyll be your new parents.Theyll be your mom and dad.
I understood instantly. So, this was how kids got permanent moms and dads! They had to be picked by them. I beamed, wondering if they were as nice in real life as they were in the video. Suddenly, I remembered the phone call Id overheard while I was cleaning the floors and understood that Mrs. Martnez was preparing for my replacement.
As part of the adoption process, I had to undergo an evaluation by a child psychiatrist in Los Angeles. My adoptive mother later gave me a copy of the report:
Recently, the patient has begun to get into trouble at school, and his newly aggressive behavior is also troublesome. It is not possible to predict the future for this child. He is vaguely aware of the possible changes in his circumstances and is reluctant to talk about his thoughts or feelings about another move. I would recommend finding permanent and stable placement for Robert in a kind and supportive environment as expeditiously as possible, which will go far to mitigate against the potentially deleterious effects of his early experiences.
Recently, the patient has begun to get into trouble at school, and his newly aggressive behavior is also troublesome. It is not possible to predict the future for this child. He is vaguely aware of the possible changes in his circumstances and is reluctant to talk about his thoughts or feelings about another move. I would recommend finding permanent and stable placement for Robert in a kind and supportive environment as expeditiously as possible, which will go far to mitigate against the potentially deleterious effects of his early experiences.
According to this doctors judgment, all I needed was a permanent and stable placement, and Id probably be okay. It seemed, at last, that I would have it.
Pre-Order My Book
Pre-Order My Book
Comments
Restacks
Jochen Weber
Jochen Weber
Jochens Substack
Jochens Substack
Jochens Substack
Aug 1, 2023
A bit in line with one of your introductory comments to the chapter, I started reading this email in bed, my husband still dozing next to me. And as I was reading, I could feel tears well up in my eyes. The honesty I sense coming from your narrative is remarkable and positively disarming. I cannot say whether this is something you foresaw (and intended), or something you might wish happens less. I guess that, deep down, I remain a "heart-bleeding liberal," hahaha.
A bit in line with one of your introductory comments to the chapter, I started reading this email in bed, my husband still dozing next to me. And as I was reading, I could feel tears well up in my eyes. The honesty I sense coming from your narrative is remarkable and positively disarming. I cannot say whether this is something you foresaw (and intended), or something you might wish happens less. I guess that, deep down, I remain a "heart-bleeding liberal," hahaha.
RE the book review you are asking subscribers to write (when the time comes), from this one chapter, I imagine my take would center around the word "opportunity". And the report of the psychiatrist shared among the last paragraphs has a perfect description of that: "It is not possible to predict the future for this child."
RE the book review you are asking subscribers to write (when the time comes), from this one chapter, I imagine my take would center around the word "opportunity". And the report of the psychiatrist shared among the last paragraphs has a perfect description of that: "It is not possible to predict the future for this child."
This is both harrowing but also encouraging! It demonstrates reality at its core. And I hope that your book will, in the coming chapters, give some indication as to your own insights as to what could have shaped, and what did shape, your "opportunities into reality."
This is both harrowing but also encouraging! It demonstrates reality at its core. And I hope that your book will, in the coming chapters, give some indication as to your own insights as to what could have shaped, and what did shape, your "opportunities into reality."
From this first chapter, my emotion-filled experience this morning tells me about the value of care, of relationships (that go well), and of the longing of children to experience a sense of "being positively attended to."
From this first chapter, my emotion-filled experience this morning tells me about the value of care, of relationships (that go well), and of the longing of children to experience a sense of "being positively attended to."
In a way, I somehow imagine that your book could be a tremendous gift for the national conversation -- something that both conservatives (who seem at times callous to people on the left) and progressives (who seem to believe that government can fix everything) need to consider: the true manifestation of these values, care and attention in relationships, requires genuine personal investment in people, which cannot be accomplished by a bureaucracy, no matter how well meaning.
In a way, I somehow imagine that your book could be a tremendous gift for the national conversation -- something that both conservatives (who seem at times callous to people on the left) and progressives (who seem to believe that government can fix everything) need to consider: the true manifestation of these values, care and attention in relationships, requires genuine personal investment in people, which cannot be accomplished by a bureaucracy, no matter how well meaning.
Rob, I simply hope you are having a productive time over the coming months, and that as the publishing date approaches, whatever residual feelings of unease remain with putting the narrative out there will give way to an overall sense of "well done" for giving people access to an honest first-person look into the kinds of systems we have put in place that seem better than nothing but ultimately a very poor replacement for the real deal: families that provide the stability children need. And that if we want to do better, we need to find ways that create sufficient cultural structures and capital for families to bind together.
Rob, I simply hope you are having a productive time over the coming months, and that as the publishing date approaches, whatever residual feelings of unease remain with putting the narrative out there will give way to an overall sense of "well done" for giving people access to an honest first-person look into the kinds of systems we have put in place that seem better than nothing but ultimately a very poor replacement for the real deal: families that provide the stability children need. And that if we want to do better, we need to find ways that create sufficient cultural structures and capital for families to bind together.
Like (14)
Reply
Share
N E B
N E B
Aug 1, 2023
People dont wake up and pick up a book; they wake up and pick up their phones...people will, if given the opportunity, read a 5,000-word essay on their phone with their head still on the pillow.
People dont wake up and pick up a book; they wake up and pick up their phones...people will, if given the opportunity, read a 5,000-word essay on their phone with their head still on the pillow.
Thats what I did this morning good call.
Thats what I did this morning good call.
The story is so compelling and disturbing, illuminating the reality of our foster care system.  Its painful, truly heartbreaking, thank you for sharing this incredibly difficult story.  Its a story that needs to be shared, I hope it gets the wide audience it deserves.  Im also rather awestruck by your courage and perseverance.  Your reading journey was interesting and I recall the same sequence of understanding the words but not the story, and gradually making it to the point where reading comprehension meant that books became more than a bunch of words on a page.
The story is so compelling and disturbing, illuminating the reality of our foster care system.  Its painful, truly heartbreaking, thank you for sharing this incredibly difficult story.  Its a story that needs to be shared, I hope it gets the wide audience it deserves.  Im also rather awestruck by your courage and perseverance.  Your reading journey was interesting and I recall the same sequence of understanding the words but not the story, and gradually making it to the point where reading comprehension meant that books became more than a bunch of words on a page.
Looking forward to the next chapter.
Looking forward to the next chapter.
Like (9)
Reply
Share
Top
Latest
Discussions

Rob Henderson

Rob Henderson

Rob Henderson

Rob Henderson

Rob Henderson

Rob Henderson

Rob Henderson

Rob Henderson

Rob Henderson

Rob Henderson


undefined subscriptions will be displayed on your profile (edit)
Skip for now
For your security, we need to re-authenticate you.
Click the link we sent to sasha.p.podolsky@gmail.com, orclick here to sign in.
Info
Shopping








0:00/4:18

0:00
/
4:18


