

1
Book meeting
Book a meeting
Many readers have been asking me to put together a reading list.
I finally did it.
My bookTroubled: A Memoir of Foster Care, Family, and Social Classis now available.
My book

is now available.
To celebrate, I'm giving away my secret reading list for free.
Ive spent several months compiling this list of the most interesting and impactful books Ive ever read.
31 books in total
Topics include human nature, psychology, social class, and more
My personal summary and reaction for each book (basically mini-reviews explaining why each book is important)
These mini-reviews took a lot more time to write than Id anticipated. I figured it would take a couple of weeks and instead it took about 4 months.
You can have it for free.
If you are interested in getting it, just follow these two steps:
1. Order a copy ofTroubled: A Memoir of Foster Care, Family, and Social Classin whatever format you want (print, ebook, or audiobook)
1. Order a copy of
in whatever format you want (print, ebook, or audiobook)
2. Send a screenshot or photo of your receipt or proof of purchase to the email address troubledmemoir@gmail.comand use the subject line SECRET READING LIST
Already purchased a copy? Just send a screenshot of your receipt to troubledmemoir@gmail.com with the subject line SECRET READING LIST and youll get the secret reading list right away.
That's it!
And if you dont receive it within 24 hours, please check your spam/junk.
Initially, the secret reading list was available only to those who pre-ordered. But so many people continue to request the list, that Im now offering it for anyone who has purchased a copy ofTroubled. Again, I also put a lot of work into the list, and hope more people find it valuable.
Initially, the secret reading list was available only to those who pre-ordered. But so many people continue to request the list, that Im now offering it for anyone who has purchased a copy of
. Again, I also put a lot of work into the list, and hope more people find it valuable.
You can order your copy ofTroubled:
You can order your copy of
:
Amazon (US)
Barnes & Noble
Bookshop
Amazon (UK)
Audible(I narrated the audiobook myself)
(I narrated the audiobook myself)
Other book vendors
Troubled: A Memoir of Foster Care, Family, and Social Classis now a National Bestseller.
is now a National Bestseller.

Top
Latest
Discussions

Rob Henderson

Rob Henderson

Rob Henderson

Rob Henderson

Rob Henderson

Rob Henderson

Rob Henderson

Rob Henderson

Rob Henderson

Rob Henderson

