

1
Book meeting
Book a meeting

Weve covered a lot of ground discussingwhat status isandindividual differencesin the desire to seek and attain it.1
Weve covered a lot of ground discussing
and
in the desire to seek and attain it.
1
But why do we care so much about statuswhy this invisible resource is so important to us?
People who learn about evolutionary psychology sometimes get a little too hung up on sex.
The core reason why humans care about status is because it was, for our ancestors, directly tied to evolutionary fitness. Status increased our ancestors likelihood of obtaining access to critical resources, securing social allies and friends, attracting romantic partners, and ultimately, the real currency of evolution: Offspring.
People focus too much on the process (sex) rather than the outcome (offspring).
The goal of evolution isnt to get you to hook up with as many people as possible, or to get you to have sex with the hottest or highest-status person. To simplify, the goal is to get you to have children that are likely to survive and carry your genes forward.
To be clear, evolution and genes are not conscious entities. They dont actually want anything; we speak this way metaphorically. We naturally speak in terms of intentions and desires because, as humans, we are social-cognitive creatures who evolved to anticipate and think about the intentions of other socially intelligent beings.
The point is that, yes, status often leads to increased romantic appeal. But sex is just a means to an end, biologically speaking. The aim for our genes is to have offspring, and sex is the way to get there. Our ancestors who had a strong desire to attain status left more children behind then those who did not. Their descendants (us), inherited this desire for respect, admiration, acceptance, and so on.
Here's a quote from the great American psychologist and philosopher William James:
To the psychologist alone can such questions occur as: Why do we smile when pleased and not scowl? Why are we unable to talk to a crowd as we talk to a single friend? Why does a particular maiden turn our wits upside down? The common man can only say, Of course we smile. Of course our heart palpitates at the sight of the crowd. Of course we love the maiden. And so probably does each animal feel about the particular things it tends to do in the presence of certain objects. To the lion it is the lioness which is made to be loved; to the bear the she-bear. To the broody hen, the notion would probably seem monstrous that there should be a creature in the world to whom a nestful of eggs was not utterly fascinating and precious and never to be too-much-sat-upon object which it is to her.
To the psychologist alone can such questions occur as: Why do we smile when pleased and not scowl? Why are we unable to talk to a crowd as we talk to a single friend? Why does a particular maiden turn our wits upside down? The common man can only say, Of course we smile. Of course our heart palpitates at the sight of the crowd. Of course we love the maiden. And so probably does each animal feel about the particular things it tends to do in the presence of certain objects. To the lion it is the lioness which is made to be loved; to the bear the she-bear. To the broody hen, the notion would probably seem monstrous that there should be a creature in the world to whom a nestful of eggs was not utterly fascinating and precious and never to be too-much-sat-upon object which it is to her.
The idea here is that it seems odd to question the reason behind things that seem so natural to us. But this is the job of evolutionary psychologists.
Why do we love our children? To a certain kind of person, this might sound nave or foolish. We just do! Why even ask such as silly question. But for evolutionary researchers, obvious phenomena are interesting. We love our children, of course, because we inherited this tendency from our ancestors. Its possible that in the distant past, some mammals didnt actually care that much about their offspring, leaving them to die. Thus, they didnt carry their genes forward. Some mammals did care for their offspring, enhancing their likelihood of survival, and passed this trait forward.
Lets address the proximate and ultimate distinction in evolution. The proximate question is about the why. Why do we behave in this way? Why do we have this trait or behavior? What are the immediate causes? The ultimate question, though, is about the how. How did this behavior arise in the first place?
Take eating. If I ask you why youre eating. Youd say because youre hungry. Silly question. But the ultimate question is, why did hunger evolve in the first place? What is hungers adaptive significance? And the answer, of course, is that we require calories in order to survive. But thats not what were thinking about when were eating. Were not motivated to eat based on some cold evolutionary calculations about food and survival. We feel hungry, and we eat. Simple.
This is also the case for status pursuit. The proximate reasons we do many things are to obtain the respect and admiration of our peers. But the ultimate question is, why does respect and admiration feel so good in the first place? Why did it evolve?
We discussed before how we do things that come naturally to us, without necessarily having a conscious awareness of them. People dont necessarily have an explicit mental model of what theyre doing at any point in time, any more than a spider weaving a web can visualize the end product that results from following its instincts.
I mentioned this beforeboth men and women want status. There dont seem to be significant differences in status pursuit between the sexes. However, status is accorded in different ways to men and women. Remember we discussed before how different cultures accord status in different ways? In America, you get status for being assertive. In more collectivist cultures, you get status for being a good listener. Theres an agency/communion distinction there. This also seems to be the case for the sexes as well. Men generally are rewarded more for being agentic, and women more for being communal. This isnt to say, of course, that men dont get status for being communal or women dont get status for being agentic. But, on average, there are differences here.
There arecommonalitiesin what confers status for men and women:
There are
in what confers status for men and women:
Health
Strong social alliances with kin and friends
Being trustworthy
Being willing to share resources
Having a wide range of knowledge and skills
These confer status not just in modern developed societies but in small hunter-gatherer communities as well.
These all facilitate survival and reproduction.
Status holds relevance for mate competition. Humans are not all equally kind, intelligent, healthy, ambitious, resourceful, attractive, empathic, generous, and so on. Men and women are not interchangeable in terms of their desirable traits. This variation gives rise to competition for desirable partners. Generally, people want to stand out on at least some of these traits in order to increase their appeal to others. But they are also simultaneously seeking such traits in their partners. This is known as mutual mate choice.
Still, while there are many similarities in terms of what men and women want in a partner, there are also plenty of differences. What are these differences?
The evolutionary psychologist David Buss has stated that the mating preferences of one sex set the ground rules for competition in the opposite sex.
What does this mean? It means that men will compete with one another to match womens preferences, and women will compete with one another to match mens preferences.
There are some differences here. To simplify, men compete with one another to appeal tolotsof women. And women compete to be chosen by the highest quality men.
There are some differences here. To simplify, men compete with one another to appeal to
of women. And women compete to be chosen by the highest quality men.
Overall, women are the choosier sex, but they still compete with one another. High-quality males tend to be choosy as well. There used to be this view, popularized in the media, that if a man cant commit, thats his insecurity, or his inadequacy, or his own personal issues. There may be some truth to that. But very desirable men, especially when young, have many options. And with an abundance of choice, they naturally are reluctant to settle on one particular person. Its not always insecurity that explains why an attractive man is reluctant to commit. Rather, an attractive man has so many options that he is careful about which to select.
The choosiest people tend to be women and highly desirable males.
The arenas of status competition differ based on sex. And this plays out in different ways. Part of the reason for these differences is that men and women have different thresholds in their preferences for casual sex.
Research indicates that men are far more willing to accept an invitation for casual sex from an opposite-sex stranger. A couple ofclassicstudieshave actually carried out empirical investigations of this. Researchers paid attractive actors to go up to people on a college campus and ask if theyd like to go on a date with them, if theyd like to go back to their apartment with them, and if theyd like to go to bed with them.
Research indicates that men are far more willing to accept an invitation for casual sex from an opposite-sex stranger. A couple of

have actually carried out empirical investigations of this. Researchers paid attractive actors to go up to people on a college campus and ask if theyd like to go on a date with them, if theyd like to go back to their apartment with them, and if theyd like to go to bed with them.
For women, 56% said yes to the date with the attractive male stranger, 6% said yes to going back to the strangers apartment, and zero said they would go to bed with him.
For men, half said yes to the date with the attractive female stranger, 69% said yes to going to the strangers apartment, and 75% said yes to going to bed with her.
As a side note, many of the men who declined expressed explicit regret, saying they had a girlfriend, or that their fianc was in town, or expressed a kind of apology. Relatedly, other studies have found that when you ask men and women about their sexual histories, women are far more likely than men to express regret about their sexual encounters, essentially wishing they hadnt had some of these experiences. For men, they were far more likely to regret acts of sexualomission, or missing out on or declining opportunities for sex.
As a side note, many of the men who declined expressed explicit regret, saying they had a girlfriend, or that their fianc was in town, or expressed a kind of apology. Relatedly, other studies have found that when you ask men and women about their sexual histories, women are far more likely than men to express regret about their sexual encounters, essentially wishing they hadnt had some of these experiences. For men, they were far more likely to regret acts of sexual
, or missing out on or declining opportunities for sex.
A more recent study found that women are equally likely as men to say they would have sex with a strangerif the stranger was a celebrity. Thestudywas from 2011, so the researchers asked about Brad Pitt, Johnny Depp, these A-list superstars.
A more recent study found that women are equally likely as men to say they would have sex with a strangerif the stranger was a celebrity. The
was from 2011, so the researchers asked about Brad Pitt, Johnny Depp, these A-list superstars.
Now, these guys were indeed technically strangers to the women in the study. So why did they express a willingness to sleep with them? Well, one obvious answer is status. These guys have a lot of it. But thats not the whole story. Many women dont think of these guys as strangers. Celebrities occupy a unique space in our minds, not exactly friends, but not exactly unknowns either. People cry when famous strangers theyve never met die, as if theyve lost a personal friend.
The comedian Adam Carolla has said that the reason women will sleep with celebrities is because they feel like they know them already. Hours spent watching their movies, interviews, and so on. High status is a factor, yes, but so is a deep sense of familiarity.
I mentioned before that men compete to be attractive to lots of women, and women compete to be attractive to high-quality men. Heres some interesting evidence from a Tinderstudy. On Tinder, men swipe right on more than 60% of womens profiles. Women, though, only like 4.5% of male profiles. Women are much choosier.
I mentioned before that men compete to be attractive to lots of women, and women compete to be attractive to high-quality men. Heres some interesting evidence from a Tinder
. On Tinder, men swipe right on more than 60% of womens profiles. Women, though, only like 4.5% of male profiles. Women are much choosier.
Does this pattern just hold for Tinder, which is widely regarded as more of a hookup app compared than others?
Apparently no. On the dating app Hinge, which users consider to be more of a serious, relationship-oriented app, 10 percent of menreceive60% of the likes. This likely contributes to the pattern I raised earlier about desirable males being unwilling to commit. A small pool of males are receiving a lot of attention, and they will naturally be reluctant to enter a serious relationship. Many of the women who date these guys become frustrated as a result. This pattern has likely existed long before dating apps, but the apps have amplified this pre-existing trend. In college, I knew good looking and successful dudes who made these apps into a game. Theyd see how many women they could sleep with in a 24 hour period, or in a single weekend. That wasnt necessarily a possibility before the apps.
Apparently no. On the dating app Hinge, which users consider to be more of a serious, relationship-oriented app, 10 percent of men
60% of the likes. This likely contributes to the pattern I raised earlier about desirable males being unwilling to commit. A small pool of males are receiving a lot of attention, and they will naturally be reluctant to enter a serious relationship. Many of the women who date these guys become frustrated as a result. This pattern has likely existed long before dating apps, but the apps have amplified this pre-existing trend. In college, I knew good looking and successful dudes who made these apps into a game. Theyd see how many women they could sleep with in a 24 hour period, or in a single weekend. That wasnt necessarily a possibility before the apps.
I told Jordan Peterson about a friend of mine who had more than 20,000 matches across the dating apps. Jordan suggested that the use of such apps might be cultivating Dark Triad personality traits in their users. I cited some research indicating that app users tend to score higher on these traits, but Jordan suggested that they were actually changing people who used them. Im not familiar with any research on that question, but it does remind me of a story.
My friend who had all those thousands of matches is now in a committed relationship with a smart and talented woman. My friend disclosed to me recently that back when he was single, he did feel himself start to change. He explained that he started viewing dating as a game, or a conquest, and gradually started to overlook the fact that his dates were human beings as opposed to sources of pleasure.
Okay, so why do men compete for status? And why do men want to attract lots of women, while women aim to attract only high-quality men? Well, we have to think again about sex differences.
Parental investment theory was pioneered by the evolutionary biologist Robert Trivers, who suggested that the sex who invests more in offspring will be choosier.
Heres an analogy. Imagine that in order to open up a joint business bank account, the bank requires two people to sign the agreement, and requires one person to invest $1 million, and one person to invest only $1.
Well, who is going to be more careful about who they open the account withthe person who invests only a dollar, or the person who invests a million?
In the analogy, women are investing a million dollars. In the ancestral environment, women carried outsize risk with pregnancy and childrearing. Men invest a dollar, or a single sexual encounter with no pregnancy and smaller parental obligations.
So women call the shots. Women more carefully scrutinize men than the reverse, especially regarding casual sex.
When it comes to appearance and type of sexual encounter, interestingly, the pattern is reversed for women and men. For men, they tend to have low standards for physical attractiveness when it comes to casual sex, and higher standards when it comes to a serious relationship. Women, in contrast, tend to raise their standards of physical attractiveness when it comes to casual sex and are willing to lower them somewhat for long-term committed relationships. This is perhaps because women on some level understand that a highly physically attractive man will be potentially unfaithful in a committed relationship. In fact, some studies indicate that in couples, both men and women tend to be the happiest when the woman is more physically attractive than the man. And the least happy when the man is more attractive than the womanwomen in couples are especially likely to be unhappy when their partner is more physically attractive than themselves.
Status competition between men is especially intense due to differences in parental investment. Women are selective, and men compete to be selected by striving to attain status.Researchand everyday observation confirms that accomplished and successful men tend to have more romantic partners, more extramarital affairs, more offspring, and, in the case of hunter-gatherer societies, a larger share of surviving offspring.
Status competition between men is especially intense due to differences in parental investment. Women are selective, and men compete to be selected by striving to attain status.
and everyday observation confirms that accomplished and successful men tend to have more romantic partners, more extramarital affairs, more offspring, and, in the case of hunter-gatherer societies, a larger share of surviving offspring.
It's important to remember the proximate/ultimate distinction. People, both men and women, often are not overtly and consciously thinking I want to increase my status to have more offspring. Perhaps the closest would be young people who do sometimes think If I do X, it will make me more attractive or increase my chance of getting a girlfriend or something along those lines. But rememberbeing attractive is not the goal of evolution, nor is getting a girlfriend. The ultimate aim is having surviving offspring, which no one thinks about when they go about their business of trying to be respected and admired.
Womens preferences set the ground rules for male status competition. Asking, what do women want? Is not unlike asking, what do men compete to signal about themselves?
Theres commitment, expressed in the form of kindness, love, investment, and intimacy.
Mencompeteover occupational prestige, income, physical strength, and physical attractiveness. These things all signal underlying qualities. Personality, ambition, ability to protect, andabilityto acquire critical resources. These qualities were important in the ancestral environment, and today they might be expressed differently but the logic underlying them is the same.

over occupational prestige, income, physical strength, and physical attractiveness. These things all signal underlying qualities. Personality, ambition, ability to protect, and
to acquire critical resources. These qualities were important in the ancestral environment, and today they might be expressed differently but the logic underlying them is the same.
Men in small-scale societies competed over being the best at hunting, or storytelling, or tool making.
Today, they might compete over being the best at sports, or standup comedy, or tech innovation.
Im going to use a song from the 1992 Disney movieAladdinto explore male traits that women find sexually attractive. These are the traits that encompass male intrasexual competition. Intrasexual here means within sex, describing how males contend with one another to stand out.
Im going to use a song from the 1992 Disney movie
to explore male traits that women find sexually attractive. These are the traits that encompass male intrasexual competition. Intrasexual here means within sex, describing how males contend with one another to stand out.
I like this movie and this song. Its probably better thanThe Lion King, an opinion that doesnt always go over well with my fellow millennials. Back in 2019 there was that stupid Will SmithAladdinmovie which was not good, but it led me to rewatch the Disney version. And damn this song slaps, as the kids say (I actually dont know if they still say that).
I like this movie and this song. Its probably better than
, an opinion that doesnt always go over well with my fellow millennials. Back in 2019 there was that stupid Will Smith
movie which was not good, but it led me to rewatch the Disney version. And damn this song slaps, as the kids say (I actually dont know if they still say that).
The song is Prince Ali. For those of you who havent seen it, the titular character is trying to win the love and affection of Princess Jasmine. He obtains a magical lamp and a Genie (played by Robin Williams in his best role ever) grants Aladdins wish to turn him into Prince Ali.
So Prince Ali is competing with a bunch of other suitors for Jasmine. And Robin Williams Genie performs a song in Aladdins grand introduction. Lets walk through some of the lyrics.
Genuflect, show some respect, down on one knee!
This is straight up social status.
Throughout the song, Genie stresses Aladdins position as Prince Ali. He references his immense wealth and world-class menagerie of exotic-type mammals.
Today,researchshows that a man at the top of the earnings distribution has a more than 90% chance of having found a committed romantic partner. In contrast, for men at the bottom, less than 40% find one.
Today,
shows that a man at the top of the earnings distribution has a more than 90% chance of having found a committed romantic partner. In contrast, for men at the bottom, less than 40% find one.
Whats also interesting is that Jasmine herself is a princess in a very wealthy family. Yet Genie understands evolutionary psychology enough to highlight that Aladdin is also extremely wealthy. Research has found that women who are themselves financially successful assign even more importance to attracting mates who are financially well-off, educated, and intelligent.
Prosperous women tend to have a strong preference to partner with accomplished men.
Then Genie boasts about Prince Alis great strength. Strong as ten regular men, definitely!
And He faced the galloping hordes, a hundred bad guys with swords!
Women like physically formidable men.
Muscularity is a huge predictor of romantic appeal. Onestudyof more than 7,000 men found that muscle mass was associated with more sexual partners in the last year and more sexual partners overall.
Muscularity is a huge predictor of romantic appeal. One
of more than 7,000 men found that muscle mass was associated with more sexual partners in the last year and more sexual partners overall.
A study on males aged 18 to 59 found that muscularity is significantly positively associated with the number of total sexual partners and partners in the last year.
In anotherstudy, researchers asked two different groups of women to look at photos of different men and rate how strong the men looked. Results showed that the rated strength of a male body accounts for 70 percent of the variance in attractiveness (this is a massive effect size). From the paper: None of the women produced a preference for weaker menin both samples, the strongest men were the most attractive, the weakest men were the least attractive.
In another
, researchers asked two different groups of women to look at photos of different men and rate how strong the men looked. Results showed that the rated strength of a male body accounts for 70 percent of the variance in attractiveness (this is a massive effect size). From the paper: None of the women produced a preference for weaker menin both samples, the strongest men were the most attractive, the weakest men were the least attractive.
Handgrip strength is correlated with self-assessed happiness, health, social confidence, overall physical attractiveness, and overall number of sexual partners.
To me, the most interestingfindingin this line of work is that how tough a guy looks to men appears to be a much stronger predictor of mating success than how attractive he is to women.
To me, the most interesting
in this line of work is that how tough a guy looks to men appears to be a much stronger predictor of mating success than how attractive he is to women.
Researchers recorded short videos of 157 different men. Next, another group of men watched these videos. Researchers asked them a question about each of the men in the videos: How likely is it that this man would win a physical fight with another man? They used a scale ranging from extremely likely to extremely unlikely.
A group of women also viewed the videos. They responded to a question about each of the men: How sexually attractive is this man? They used a scale ranging from extremely unattractive to extremely attractive.
Eighteen months later, the men in the videos completed a questionnaire asking about their sexual history over the 18 months. How tough a guy looked to men predicted his reported mating success better than how attractive he looked to women. The researchers concluded, Men with higher physical dominance, but not sexual attractiveness, reported higher quantitative mating success.
In fact, some evolutionary psychologists have argued that throughout human history, dominance has been more important than attractiveness for mens mating success.
Take beards. Evidence is mixed about whether women find beards attractive. Some women like them, others dont, and for others, it depends. But there is clear evidence that men view other men with beards as more intimidating than clean-shaven men.
Or take deep voices. Women are likely to think deep voices are attractive. But in comparison, men are even more likely to think deep voices are intimidating.
Male competition has given rise to male traits like strong muscles, deep voices, and facial hair. Men evolved these traits not so much because women find them sexy, but more because other men find them intimidating.
Secondary sex characteristics are more like deers antlers than peacocks tails. The peacock tail evolved to attract female peahens. But male deer evolved antlers not to impress female deer, but to compete with other males. That seems to be the case for many of the characteristics of human males.
Hes got ninety-five white Persian monkeys, and to view them he charges no fee (hes generous, so generous).
What are the signals here? Kindness and generosity. Also recall that earlier in the movie Aladdin gives his bread to the hungry children. And he rescues Jasmine from having her hand chopped off by the guard who observed her shoplifting, unaware that she was in fact the princess.
The evolutionary psychologist Geoffrey Miller hassuggestedthat moral virtues such as kindness, generosity, and heroism may have evolved in part through mate choice.
The evolutionary psychologist Geoffrey Miller has
that moral virtues such as kindness, generosity, and heroism may have evolved in part through mate choice.
The idea is that our ancestors sharpened our moral features by selecting kind-hearted mates. Aclassic studyby David Buss found that across 37 cultures, kindness is, on average, the most desirable trait in a romantic partner.
The idea is that our ancestors sharpened our moral features by selecting kind-hearted mates. A
by David Buss found that across 37 cultures, kindness is, on average, the most desirable trait in a romantic partner.
Relatedly (and unsurprisingly), men aremore likelyto donate to charity when women are observing them. A cynical view is that they are just trying to get laid. A more positive view is that mate choice is a powerful tool to select for kindness and exert pressure on people to be kind.
Relatedly (and unsurprisingly), men are
to donate to charity when women are observing them. A cynical view is that they are just trying to get laid. A more positive view is that mate choice is a powerful tool to select for kindness and exert pressure on people to be kind.
Goodness serves as a costly fitness indicator. As Miller puts it, if a signal is so costly that only high health, high status, high condition animals can afford to produce it, the signal can remain evolutionarily reliable. A wealthy man, confident in his deep pockets, can afford to give vast riches away.
And Genie sings about how handsome Prince Ali is.
Genie stresses Aladdins good looks, while Aladdin gives the crowd a twinkling smile.
Appearance is a cue for good health. For women in the ancestral environment, mating with someone who was unhealthy would have posed potentially serious risks, such as being unable to provide resources, protection, and help with raising children.
Womenjudgesymmetrical faces and masculine faces to be more attractive. Otherstudieshave found that when women are asked them to pick out the healthiest looking men, their responses are indistinguishable from their judgments of the most attractive men.
Women
symmetrical faces and masculine faces to be more attractive. Other
have found that when women are asked them to pick out the healthiest looking men, their responses are indistinguishable from their judgments of the most attractive men.
The sexy son hypothesis is also relevant. The idea is that females choose males who are attractive to other females because if they have a child, the child is likely to be attractive too. The child will then be an attractive adult and will be more likely to attract partners have children. Richard Dawkins inThe Selfish Genehas written, The result of this is that one of the most desirable qualities a male can have in the eyes of a female is, quite simply, sexual attractiveness itself.
The sexy son hypothesis is also relevant. The idea is that females choose males who are attractive to other females because if they have a child, the child is likely to be attractive too. The child will then be an attractive adult and will be more likely to attract partners have children. Richard Dawkins in
has written, The result of this is that one of the most desirable qualities a male can have in the eyes of a female is, quite simply, sexual attractiveness itself.
Later in the movie, not part of the song, Genie tells Aladdin to tell Jasmine the truth about how he actually isnt really a prince.
Aladdin doesnt want Jasmine to learn that he is not actually a prince but a street rat. Genie (archetype: mentor) advises him to be honest with her.
A 2019 studytitledBe yourself: Authenticity as a long-term mating strategy found that honesty is associated with desirable relationship outcomes.
A 2019 study
Be yourself: Authenticity as a long-term mating strategy found that honesty is associated with desirable relationship outcomes.
The correlation coefficient between authenticity in relationships and relationship satisfaction is very large (r = .56).
The researchers administered the Authenticity in Relationships Scale, which asked study participants how much they agreed with statements such as I share my deepest thoughts with my partner even if theres a chance he/she wont understand them and I am basically the same person with my partner as I am with other people I care about.
Authenticity was strongly associated with high relationship commitment, high relationship satisfaction, and low sociosexual orientation (i.e., relatively little interest in casual sex, romantic affairs, etc.). People high on authenticity also scored relatively low on the Dark Triad personality traits (narcissism, psychopathy, and Machiavellianism).
The study also found that authentic people tend to mate with other authentic people, whereas deceptive individuals tend to attract deceptive partners. This is consistent with other research indicating that people with personality disordersnarcissistic, psychopathic, passive-aggressive, avoidant, sadistic, and so ontend to enter relationships with one another.
The authenticity researchers conclude that authenticity requires taking emotional risks, which is a costly signal of commitment and interest. It is a reliable cue that such a person is worthy as a long-term partner.
Women want honest signals. Getting a Genie to make you in a wealthy prince is a cheap signal, it doesnt express anything about your underlying traits or abilities.
Here are the 3 basic elements of signaling theory:
1. People differ in underlying attributes (this could be physical strength, kindness, wealth, and so on)
2. The attributes are visibly unclear at first glance
3. People differ in the strength of the signals emitted for these underlying attributes
For a signal to count as honest, it must be costly and difficult to emit. Only a truly talented and disciplined athlete can win a sports championship. Only a truly wealthy person can afford to publicly and verifiably donate a large sum to a philanthropic organization. Only a truly funny person can sell out an arena for a standup comedy show. These are costly signals of someones underlying attributes.
So here we have some of the traits that are arenas for male intrasexual competition in their quest for status, romantic partners, and, ultimately, in an evolutionary sense, offspring.
Physical formidability, occupational prestige/economic success/wealth, kindness/generosity/moral character, appearance, muscularity, and fashion.
In the end, Aladdin comes clean with Jasmine. They fall in love and get married, thus, in an indirect way, fulfilling Aladdins original wish of becoming a prince. An implicit message is that there are no shortcuts in the heros journey. Aladdin didnt really become a prince when he first wished for itthat artificial title was quickly stripped from him. Genie went on and on in his song introducing Prince Ali, telling lies about how great Aladdin was.
When Jasmine learned it was all a ruse, she was repulsed. This is consistent with the idea that the qualities that lead to wealth and status are perhaps more important than the wealth and status in and of themselves, because if those things are stripped from someone, certain intrinsic qualities indicate that they can potentially obtain them once again.
Compared with a lottery-winning millionaire, women will find a man who earned his wealth by working hard, making wise business decisions, and forming trusted relationships to be more impressive and attractive. Only when Aladdin undertook immense risks and nearly died in order to defeat Jafar (the Shadow) and rescue those he cared about did he actually become worthy in the eyes of the Sultan (a playful Disney version of the all-powerful king archetype) and Jasmine (symbolic of female sexual selection, the Goddess archetype, and mother nature).
Some scholars have suggested that human sporting competitions act as male leks. Leks are essentially ritualized contests to establish physical dominance. Elk and deer get into these contests.
Some researchers have suggested that the Irish elk went extinct several thousand years ago because their antlers became so large upon maturity that they could no longer hold up their heads. This is a kind of runaway sexual selection that backfired. Sometimes I wonder if theres an analogy to be drawn here for education and status competition among humans. Some of you may be aware that the fertility rate is collapsing around the world, especially in rich, developed countries. Perhaps just as the Irish elk continued to grow their antlers to compete and stand out for mates, so it is with humans who are pursuing credentials and education and wealth and status. Developing increasingly heavy CVs or resumes to the point where they can no longer lift their heads, so to speak.
Among male humans, prestige accrued to victors based on the collective evaluations of other males. In small-scale communities and in organized sports in modern societies, men are the primary participants in, and spectators of, sports. They collectively decide who of these athletes is talented and worthy of esteem. Women observe this and tend to find high-status male athletes attractive not only because they are, of course, physically fit, but also because of the prestige these men are bestowed by their peers. As an example, among World War II veterans, men who received the Medal of Honor, the highest military decoration for courage and bravery,alsohad more offspring compared with other veterans in that war. This is consistent with the idea that men who are conferred prestige by their fellow males are also considered to be more attractive by women.
Among male humans, prestige accrued to victors based on the collective evaluations of other males. In small-scale communities and in organized sports in modern societies, men are the primary participants in, and spectators of, sports. They collectively decide who of these athletes is talented and worthy of esteem. Women observe this and tend to find high-status male athletes attractive not only because they are, of course, physically fit, but also because of the prestige these men are bestowed by their peers. As an example, among World War II veterans, men who received the Medal of Honor, the highest military decoration for courage and bravery,
had more offspring compared with other veterans in that war. This is consistent with the idea that men who are conferred prestige by their fellow males are also considered to be more attractive by women.
So in a sense, women are outsourcing the cognitive burden of mate selection onto the men. The men organize some kind of contest, the women stand back and observe, and then choose the victor, or the men the other males decide is talented. This is likely why in mixed sex environments, men do a lot of talking. Theyre partaking in a kind of verbal jousting with one another, a playful form of verbal combat, in an attempt to show off their wit, their sense of humor, their cleverness, and so on. Often women are well aware that this is what is happening, even if the men themselves are oblivious, and women sometimes enjoy seeing it all play out.
Here's a painting I saw hanging in an art museum in Naples last year:
You can see that the victor of this bloody dispute is surrounded by the fawning adoration of several women. And you can see here Roman slaves dragging away the dead body of the vanquished rival. A raw image that captures the logic of intrasexual competition; of men competing and women subsequently channeling their interest to the winner.
A thought has occurred to me that I wouldnt say if I were delivering this lecture at Cambridge or Yale or some other elite college. This is something that is mostly speculation on my part.
I think mate evaluation is a core reason why some women to try to enter elite male spaces. Fraternities, male clubs, high-status formerly male organizations and occupations, and so on. The idea is that women might want to get closer to high-status males by entering these spaces in order to get a more reliable and honest evaluation of these men by watching them interact with one another. A sort of front row seat to intrasexual competition among high status men. This isnt to say that this is a conscious decision, but more of an unconscious evolutionary impulse dressed up in the language of our time and cultureequity, access, inclusivity, and so on.
Anyway, attempts to demonstrate physical formidability can take on different forms. Often, what men want to do is to signal awillingnessto engage in physical combat, but would prefer not to pay the cost of actually doing so.
Anyway, attempts to demonstrate physical formidability can take on different forms. Often, what men want to do is to signal a
to engage in physical combat, but would prefer not to pay the cost of actually doing so.
The author and law enforcement expert Rory Miller wrote a terrific book calledMeditations on Violence. In that book, he outlined what he described as the monkey dance. This ritual primarily takes place among young men.
The author and law enforcement expert Rory Miller wrote a terrific book called
. In that book, he outlined what he described as the monkey dance. This ritual primarily takes place among young men.
Here are the steps. Imagine this is taking place at a bar or a concert or some other large gathering in which there are spectators and bystanders.
First, theres the eye contact, or hard stare.
Second, a verbal challenge. What are you lookin at? or You got a problem bro?
Third, the closing of distance, with possible chest bumping, and arm extension. The biologist Adam Hart has pointed out that men will often extend their arms in order to increase perception of body size. This is why you see boxers and MMA fighters at weigh-ins raise their arms, flex their biceps, and flare out their muscles, in an attempt to take up space and look extra formidable and intimidating.
Okay, fourth, theres the finger poke or the two-handed push to the chest. Maybe accompanied with step off or back the fuck up or get the fuck out of my face.
Fifth, if it escalates, one of the participants will throw a dominant roundhouse punch.
There are a couple of interesting things to note about the male monkey dance.
First is that fact that it is so predictable. It has the appearance of a formalized ritual.
Second, is that they appear to be calibrated to supply accurate and honest assessments of formidability. They slowly escalate. There is interestingresearchabout this idea of a fair fight. The fair fight concept seems to be universal, and researchers have speculated that the reason is because slow escalating fair fights allow the participants and the spectators to form honest judgments of the fighters. Imagine if, at step one of the monkey dance, one guy just grabs a bottle and breaks it over the other guys head. You might think this guy is crazier than the other guy, but you wouldnt necessarily have an accurate assessment of his underlying physical ability.
Second, is that they appear to be calibrated to supply accurate and honest assessments of formidability. They slowly escalate. There is interesting
about this idea of a fair fight. The fair fight concept seems to be universal, and researchers have speculated that the reason is because slow escalating fair fights allow the participants and the spectators to form honest judgments of the fighters. Imagine if, at step one of the monkey dance, one guy just grabs a bottle and breaks it over the other guys head. You might think this guy is crazier than the other guy, but you wouldnt necessarily have an accurate assessment of his underlying physical ability.
Another interesting thing to point out about the monkey dance is that it is almost always played by two men of roughly the same size and same age. You seldom see a young male play the monkey dance with a woman, or an elderly person, or a child, or someone who is obviously high on drugs or crazy. The dance takes place between two apparently equally matched people, because there is a question of who would win.
Often, these monkey dances conclude when a third party interferes. A friend of one of the men might get between them, which allows the man to say Youre lucky hes holding me back, thus offering him a reputationally safe out. He has signaled willingness to fight without having to pay the physical cost of actually doing so.
Okay so heres another arena of male status competition weve been discussing. Professional and economic success. These are honest indicators of resource acquisition ability.
This might be whyworkaholismis more pronounced amongmen, and especially among upper and upper-middle-class men. Professional success increases the odds of reproductive success, and it increases the amount of resources you can invest in your offspring.
This might be why
is more pronounced among
, and especially among upper and upper-middle-class men. Professional success increases the odds of reproductive success, and it increases the amount of resources you can invest in your offspring.
There are some amusing studies on what men choose to highlight about themselves in their social media photos. Men are more likely than women to post photos of themselves next to expensive cars or hanging out in exotic locales. They want to signal their resources, wealth, perhaps their social connections, and other markers of success. Men also denigrate other males successes in this arena. Theyll call men weak and pathetic but theyll also call each other poor or losers and so on or attempt to undermine their success or call it into question. I havent seen research on this but my sense is that haters are more likely to be male than female. But maybe thats because Im male and therefore attract that kind of unpleasant male behavior, whereas women might be more likely to receive negative attention from female haters.
Men compete on kindness and generosity, as weve discussed. Among hunter-gatherers, sharing the meat is a big deal, and men who have more successful hunts and share more meat are more likely to obtain status and typically have more children than the other men.
Astudya few years ago found that men donate more to an attractive female fundraiser when they see a large donation made by another male. A related finding in the physical domain is that men are more likely to do dangerous stunts when they are observed by women in order to impress them. Researchers did this at a skate park. On some occasions, they sent a young male assistant to ask skateboarders about their tricks and asked if they could observe them. On other occasions, they sent a young female assistant to do this task. They found that male skateboarders were much more likely to take great risks when the female researcher was observing them.
A
a few years ago found that men donate more to an attractive female fundraiser when they see a large donation made by another male. A related finding in the physical domain is that men are more likely to do dangerous stunts when they are observed by women in order to impress them. Researchers did this at a skate park. On some occasions, they sent a young male assistant to ask skateboarders about their tricks and asked if they could observe them. On other occasions, they sent a young female assistant to do this task. They found that male skateboarders were much more likely to take great risks when the female researcher was observing them.
This brings us to an interestingfindingon what are called buried signals. The idea is that sometimes people will conceal good qualities about themselves. In this case, researchers looked at why on earth anyone would donate a large sum of money anonymously. Based on everything weve been discussing, why would it make sense to obscure a positive trait about yourself in this way? Well, the study basically found that almost no anonymous donations are truly anonymous. A few people do usually find out, and these people tend to be prominent and important and well-connected people. These are the people who the donor typically hopes to impress. Moreover, by keeping it anonymous, it adds to the perception of the donors goodness. They didnt want public credit, but only those in the know find out.
This brings us to an interesting
on what are called buried signals. The idea is that sometimes people will conceal good qualities about themselves. In this case, researchers looked at why on earth anyone would donate a large sum of money anonymously. Based on everything weve been discussing, why would it make sense to obscure a positive trait about yourself in this way? Well, the study basically found that almost no anonymous donations are truly anonymous. A few people do usually find out, and these people tend to be prominent and important and well-connected people. These are the people who the donor typically hopes to impress. Moreover, by keeping it anonymous, it adds to the perception of the donors goodness. They didnt want public credit, but only those in the know find out.
Another point on buried signals. Often youll find that people who are highly accomplished are modest. Theyre humble. But they can afford to behave this way. If you have lots of achievements and positive qualities, chances are at least some of them will be revealed in due time. But if you only have one good quality or talent, youll want to be quick to talk about it and highlight it, because its all you have.
Returning to the kindness and generosity point, this might be why men with dog photos get 20%more likeson dating apps compared with those having no dog photo. In contrast, men with cat photos get 5%fewerlikes. Taking care of a dog takes a lot of work and attentive care. Cats require very little maintenance. So being a dog owner signals that you have certain desirable qualitiesconscientiousness, kindness, affection, and so on.
Returning to the kindness and generosity point, this might be why men with dog photos get 20%
on dating apps compared with those having no dog photo. In contrast, men with cat photos get 5%
likes. Taking care of a dog takes a lot of work and attentive care. Cats require very little maintenance. So being a dog owner signals that you have certain desirable qualitiesconscientiousness, kindness, affection, and so on.
That wraps up our discussion of male status competition.
Unfortunately, female status competition in humans is less well understood. It hasnt been given as much focus, perhaps because it is more subtle and more puzzling. Still, many researchers haveproducedfascinatingworkin this area.
Unfortunately, female status competition in humans is less well understood. It hasnt been given as much focus, perhaps because it is more subtle and more puzzling. Still, many researchers have
fascinating
in this area.
Women compete for statusbecausehigh-status women generally have increased access to high-status men. The reverse is true as well, of course. The economist Bryan Caplan has suggested that one of the main reasons to go to university isnt just to increase your economic prospects, but your romantic prospects as well. By obtaining a degree, you immediately put yourself into a different dating pool, with people who are more likely to be higher on intelligence, conscientiousness, curiosity, ambition, and so on.
Women compete for status
high-status women generally have increased access to high-status men. The reverse is true as well, of course. The economist Bryan Caplan has suggested that one of the main reasons to go to university isnt just to increase your economic prospects, but your romantic prospects as well. By obtaining a degree, you immediately put yourself into a different dating pool, with people who are more likely to be higher on intelligence, conscientiousness, curiosity, ambition, and so on.
And since were talking about female mate choice, Ill take this opportunity to bring up the story of the Princeton Mom from about ten years ago. The story was that a Princeton alumna, who had a daughter who was then attending the university, wrote an op-ed in their student newspaper, addressing young female students on campus. The essential message to young women was, Hey, youre surrounded by a ton of promising and smart young men. So you should seriously consider getting a committed boyfriend and think about marriage. One notable quote was something like Youll never be surrounded by so many men who are worthy of you again. She was basically right, in my view.
Predictably, she was excoriated. This middle-aged Princeton mom was called anti-feminist and whatever nonsense the student activists could come up with. But there is a lot of truth to what she wrote. These institutions select for very promising people, and these environments can be ideal for finding a committed romantic partner. Perhaps this is one reason why, as I suggested earlier, so many women wanted to attend college. In the past, of course, they wanted economic emancipation and success and all the things all of us want, but I also wonder if they wanted to simply get closer to high-status young men.
Okay, so other benefits to high status for women. Greater access to critical resources for offspring care, and more social support for themselves and their offspring, and a higher rate of offspring survival. This pattern holds true in small-scale traditional societies as well as in modern developed countries. Status isnt just a male thing, and it doesnt just confer benefits to men. There are serious advantages for women too, which is why they also desire and pursue and compete for it.
So here are a few arenas of intrasexual female competition. Unfortunately Im unaware of any Disney song that we can use to crib the lyrics and go through them that way.
There is, of course, physical attractiveness. Fidelity is also important, as is generosity, patience, and kindness, which may signal maternal ability, or ability to care for offspring and raise them to become self-sufficient.
Intrasexual competition among women and girls is typically indirect. Females often target their rivals fidelity and chastity, questioning their sexual past or low standards for sexual activity. Slut shaming, essentially.
Questioning someones sexual history is actually a vicious charge to make, in some sense, because its hard to prove a negative.
For men, if I call a guy weak, or poor, he can easily disprove me by lifting some heavy weight or buying an expensive sports car. But if a woman calls another woman a slut, how can she disprove this? Its tricky.
Well speak about physical attractiveness for a moment. Why are men so drawn to it? The features that cultures around the world find attractive in women are indicators of youth and fertility. Regardless of culture, women tend to be deemed most attractive when they are in their early twenties. This coincides with when women are the most likely to conceive. In no culture have 10 year olds or 70 year olds been considered the most attractive. We are the descendants of humans who found fertile women to be highly attractive. When you ask women of various ages what age men they most prefer, they typically prefer men who are around their own age. This is true for teenage girls all the way up to elderly women.
For men, regardless of age, they tend to say women are most attractive at around 23 or 24. This is true for teenage malesa fourteen-year-old boy will say that age 23 is the most physically attractive for women, and so will a seventy-year-old man.
I once had a long conversation with Helen Joyce, a writer and journalist atThe Economist. Shes a writer but also has a PhD in pure mathematics. A very bright person.
I once had a long conversation with Helen Joyce, a writer and journalist at
. Shes a writer but also has a PhD in pure mathematics. A very bright person.
She told me that only post-menopausal women are truly human. Now, she was half-joking when she said this but her point was both funny and insightful. The idea is that women who reach menopause can no longer conceive and are thus out of the game, so to speak, regarding mating rituals and all the attendant smokescreens around mating behavior.
Young women are still in the game, they spend a lot of time wanting to look good, to land a partner, to keep the one they have, and so on. And men, sadly, never really exit the game. Because men are capable of reproducing their whole lives, they never truly gain full control of their own humanity. If its true that older women have this unique form of wisdom, maybe we could spend a little more time listening to people like the Princeton mom and other older women, who have lived a bit of life and are no longer in the game.
Zooming into the nuances of intrasexual competition, studies show that physically attractive women are disproportionately targeted for aggression from other women. Much of this is likely rooted in envy, and often physically attractive women will dress defensively to avoid same-sex aggression from their peers.
Other studies find that women are reluctant to befriend women who wear makeup, or promote the careers of women who wear makeup, perhaps due to envy.
One interestingfindingis that women actually prefer to take appearance-related advice from gay men rather than their female friends. This is because women believe gay men are more likely to be honest, whereas female peers might give less than honest advice to reduce competition.
One interesting
is that women actually prefer to take appearance-related advice from gay men rather than their female friends. This is because women believe gay men are more likely to be honest, whereas female peers might give less than honest advice to reduce competition.
I was at a house gathering a few years back hanging out with some girls and listened as they were discussing whether they wanted to go out that night or not. The most attractive girl in the group was plainly dressed, jeans and a basic shirt, and asked if she should change into something nicer. One of the other girls said no, you look great how you are, no need to change. Well, this girl heard that and immediately got up and went upstairs to change her clothes.
So heres an interestingstudy. Researchers recruited female college students and showed them these silhouettes of female figures and gave them markers to draw and color them in.
So heres an interesting
. Researchers recruited female college students and showed them these silhouettes of female figures and gave them markers to draw and color them in.
The researchers asked these women to draw what kind of clothes they would wear either to a mixed-sex gatheringa mixer on campus. And they asked these women to draw what they would wear to an all-female mixer. So on the left, in the A column, are examples of the kind of clothes women said theyd wear to the mixed-sex gathering in which men would be present. And on the right, in the B column, are examples of what women would wear to an all-female gathering.
The basic finding was that women drew clothes that exposed more skin when they expected to meet men, and dressed much more modestly when they expected to meet only women.
Women are also more likely to express aggression toward women who are dressed more promiscuously. The researchers showed female participants a series of images of women in different types of clothes and asked how they would behave toward them.
For the modestly dressed woman, female participants reported relatively low willingness to express any kind of aggression, whether direct or indirect.
For women who showed more skin, women were not more likely to express direct aggression, which makes sense because women are generally unlikely to express overt hostility the way men do to their rivals. But women were more likely to express indirect aggression toward these women, both to their faces and behind their backs.
The researchers also tested whether this effect was due to attractiveness or to clothing. So they showed participants images of overweight women who wore a revealing outfit and found that female participants were still more likely to express indirect aggression toward her, relative to the modestly dressed thin woman.
I mentioned before that women tend to derogate their rivals sexual history and reputations.
The evolutionary psychologist Tania Reynolds has developed aconceptcalled the Bless her heart effect. The phrase originates from the South. There, people will sometimes say unkind things but soften it by adding bless their heart at the end. So the idea here is that women will communicate negative, reputation-damaging information about their rivals, but couch it in such a way as to have plausible deniability, and communicate it in a way that expresses concern, or good character on the part of the speaker. For instance, a woman might say, Im really worried about Jane. Shes been taking a lot of boys from Tinder home and I just dont want to see her get hurt. On the surface, the message communicates concern and compassion, but it also communicates that Jane is not the most sexually chaste person in the world.
The evolutionary psychologist Tania Reynolds has developed a
called the Bless her heart effect. The phrase originates from the South. There, people will sometimes say unkind things but soften it by adding bless their heart at the end. So the idea here is that women will communicate negative, reputation-damaging information about their rivals, but couch it in such a way as to have plausible deniability, and communicate it in a way that expresses concern, or good character on the part of the speaker. For instance, a woman might say, Im really worried about Jane. Shes been taking a lot of boys from Tinder home and I just dont want to see her get hurt. On the surface, the message communicates concern and compassion, but it also communicates that Jane is not the most sexually chaste person in the world.
There are two dominant intrasexual competition strategies, and both of these can be found among both men and women.
First, theres self-promotion. This involves amplifying ones positive characteristics. Bragging, boasting, humblebragging, posting some personal news on social media, and so on.
Then theres competitor derogation. Instead of highlighting your own good qualities, you underscore your rivals flaws. The idea here is to reduce the mate value of competitors.
Men are more direct in their aggression. They will openly trash one another and challenge each other either verbally or physically. Women do this too, but its much less common.
Women tend to be indirect. They use rumors, gossip, innuendo, threats of friendship termination, and so on. Their competitions are less deadly, but also more prolonged. Women are generally less forgiving of their rivals and more likely to hold a grudge compared with men.
Here's a story of female indirect aggression.
Its from an amazing book calledYanoama: The Story of Helena Valero. Its a biography of a Spanish girl abducted by the Kohorochiwetari, an indigenous Amazonian tribe. She recounts the frequent conflicts between different communities in the Amazon. After decades of living in various indigenous Amazonian communities, Valero managed to leave and described her experiences to an Italian biologist, who published the book in 1965.
Its from an amazing book called
. Its a biography of a Spanish girl abducted by the Kohorochiwetari, an indigenous Amazonian tribe. She recounts the frequent conflicts between different communities in the Amazon. After decades of living in various indigenous Amazonian communities, Valero managed to leave and described her experiences to an Italian biologist, who published the book in 1965.
In the book, Helena Valero describes arriving in a new tribe. Some other girls were suspicious of her. One girl gives Valero a folded packet of leaves containing a foul-smelling substance. She tells Valero that its a snack, but that if she doesnt like it she can give it to someone else. Valero finds the smell repulsive and sets it aside. Later, a small child picks up the leaf packet, takes a bite, and falls deathly ill. The child tells everyone that he got the leaf packet from Valero. The entire community accuses Valero of trying to poison the child, and banishes her from the tribe, with some firing arrows at her as she runs deep into the forest.
The girl who gave Valero the poisonous leaf packet formed a win-win strategy in her quest to eliminate her rival:
Valero eats the leaf packet and dies
Or she gives it to someone else who dies and she is blamed for it, followed by being ostracized or killed by the community
This is some high-level indirect aggression. Few men would ever think that far ahead (supervillains in movies notwithstanding). For most men, upon seeing a newcomer they view as a potential rival, they would just physically challenge him. Or kill him in his sleep or something, and that would be that.
Point is, this girl would have been responsible for Valeros demise had she died. But no one would have known. If a man in the tribe, enraged at the death of the small child, had killed Valero, then he would be recorded as her killer. Or if Valero had been mauled by a jaguar while fleeing, then her death wouldnt have been considered a murder.
There are some other differences in competition among women versus among men. The great psychologist Joyce Benenson hasconstructeda framework contrasting what she calls contest versus scramble competition. This is primarily drawn from observations of hunter-gatherer communities.
There are some other differences in competition among women versus among men. The great psychologist Joyce Benenson has
a framework contrasting what she calls contest versus scramble competition. This is primarily drawn from observations of hunter-gatherer communities.
Contest competition is more male. It is confrontational and competitive and about besting another person. The idea is to public and clearly defeat another person in some kind of conflict.
Scramble competition is solitary, subtle, and safe. Its covert, and focused on solving problems and increasing ones status on ones own, without direct comparisons to another person. The most obvious example here is using cosmetics to show ones beauty. This is a solitary activity that does not call for anyone to directly be compared with anyone else. Of course, some women do wear makeup not just to be pretty but to be prettier than other women. But this is subtle, safe, and solitary.
This brings us to the male-warrior hypothesis. The idea here has been developed by evolutionary psychologists to highlight and understand the peculiarities of male psychology.
A vast body of work has found that within same-sex peer groups, conflict is equally pervasive among the sexes. For men, the conflict is more overt, for women, its more covert.
However, when competing against a same-sex outgroup, men become more cooperative than women. That is, when an all-male group is up against another male group, the men in the group reduce conflict with one another and become more united. When an all-female group is up against another all-female group, their level of conflict within the group tends to remain relatively high. The researchers studied with male and female sports teams. Male teammates are often rude and abrasive and confrontational to one another. But come game time, they are very cooperative. They direct their hostility to the men in the opposing team. In contrast, female teams also have their share of conflict within the group, and these conflicts often play out during games against other teams. Not passing the ball, shunning a fellow teammate, freezing her out, and so on.
Men are generally more confrontational and hostile toward their allies, but they can suppress and channel it toward their adversaries. The evolutionary logic is that in the ancestral environment, men in a community had to compete with one another for romantic female partners and status within the group. However, there was a lot of tribal warfare against other groups as well. These societies would go to war in order to capture women as wives. So men learned to direct their aggressive impulses accordingly, depending on the context. There was not a lot of all-female cooperation to form teams to capture men as husbands. That just never happened, so far as we know. So women cooperating with one another against another team is an evolutionarily novel situation, which might explain these sex differences.
So well close off here with findings from a recentstudyled by David Buss on what confers status to people. This is a cross-cultural study encompassing 14 different countries.
So well close off here with findings from a recent
led by David Buss on what confers status to people. This is a cross-cultural study encompassing 14 different countries.
At the top are the things you can do to increase your status, and at the bottom are things you can do to decrease your status.
If you want to lower your status, the best thing you can do is be a stupid, unclean thief with a sexually transmitted disease.
To raise your status, the best thing you can do is be a smart and reliable leader with a degree from a fancy college.
This is the third transcript in this series of lectures I recently delivered in Miami. You can find the firsthereand the secondhere.
This is the third transcript in this series of lectures I recently delivered in Miami. You can find the first
and the second
.

Comments
Restacks
Atiyasha Kaur
Atiyasha Kaur
Aug 12, 2023
As a woman who is a data scientist and works in tech...I think there is something about woman going to college say, around male elite institutions ( even before Harvard allowed female students). Women went to very elite female colleges and lived basically next door to the elite men. So there is some truth to that. A woman who is going to MIT just for that purpose? Doubtful. Same thing in tech. There are a lot of woman who work in tech who do not work in a technical role ( aka engineers etc). They are recruiters, work in sales and marketing, project management etc. I think they have a true front row seat. They are also often very attractive women. I really dont see this with female engineers ( like myself). To be a female engineer is like going against the grain with no real social payoff. Im in it because I love math and wanted that financial independence/security. I dont think men find that attractive.
As a woman who is a data scientist and works in tech...I think there is something about woman going to college say, around male elite institutions ( even before Harvard allowed female students). Women went to very elite female colleges and lived basically next door to the elite men. So there is some truth to that. A woman who is going to MIT just for that purpose? Doubtful. Same thing in tech. There are a lot of woman who work in tech who do not work in a technical role ( aka engineers etc). They are recruiters, work in sales and marketing, project management etc. I think they have a true front row seat. They are also often very attractive women. I really dont see this with female engineers ( like myself). To be a female engineer is like going against the grain with no real social payoff. Im in it because I love math and wanted that financial independence/security. I dont think men find that attractive.
Like (6)
Reply
Share
Brandy
Brandy
Magnolia Musings
Magnolia Musings
Magnolia Musings
Aug 12, 2023
Edited
This reminded me of what my son and his friends used to call an MRS. Mrs. Someone. (I corrected this because someone below was kind enough to jog my memory). If you asked them what a specific girl was going to school for, they would laugh and give this answer. Not for all girls, but some.
This reminded me of what my son and his friends used to call an MRS. Mrs. Someone. (I corrected this because someone below was kind enough to jog my memory). If you asked them what a specific girl was going to school for, they would laugh and give this answer. Not for all girls, but some.
Like (4)
Reply
Share
Top
Latest
Discussions

Rob Henderson

Rob Henderson

Rob Henderson

Rob Henderson

Rob Henderson

Rob Henderson

Rob Henderson

Rob Henderson

Rob Henderson

Rob Henderson


undefined subscriptions will be displayed on your profile (edit)
Skip for now
For your security, we need to re-authenticate you.
Click the link we sent to sasha.p.podolsky@gmail.com, orclick here to sign in.