

1
Book meeting
Book a meeting
Below is the seventh chapter of my forthcomingbook,Troubled: A Memoir of Foster Care, Family, and Social Class.
Below is the seventh chapter of my forthcoming
,
Here are the links for thepreface,Chapter One,Chapter Two, andChapter Three,Chapter Four,Chapter Five, andChapter Six. Access is limited to paid subscribers.
Here are the links for the
,
,
, and
,
,
, and
. Access is limited to paid subscribers.
Ipreviouslyasked my readers to write a short review/reaction of these chapters, and send me the reviewhere on this form. Upon the official date of publication (February 20), Ill request that you please share your review on Amazon or Goodreads.
I
asked my readers to write a short review/reaction of these chapters, and send me the review
. Upon the official date of publication (February 20), Ill request that you please share your review on Amazon or Goodreads.
I originally aimed to receive 50 reviews, and am pleased to see that so far 71 readers have sent a submission. So Im raising the target to 100.
As an added bonus, anyone who submits an early review will be eligible to join me on a 1-on-1 video call. When 100 reviews are submitted, I will select 20 reviewers at random and invite them to schedule a time to speak with me 1-on-1. Of course, if you send a review and then receive an email invitation from me asking if youd like to speak on a video call, you are obviously free to decline or ignore it. In that case, Ill just choose someone else. Basically, if you submit a review, you have a 1 in 5 chance of joining me for a conversation where you can ask me whatever you want. Questions about the book, psychology, human nature, social class, etc. Ordinarily, I charge a nontrivial rate for 1-on-1 meetings. But in this case, the only cost is writing a couple of sentences for a short review. If, in the end, less than 100 people submit a review, then Ill just select 20% of the reviewers at random to invite for a video call.
Selling books is hard; reader reviews can make all the difference.
Troubledtook me the better part of five years to complete. If I didnt think this book was incredible, I wouldnt have written it. I wouldnt have agreed to publish it. I definitely wouldnt ask people to pay money for it. But I did and am doing all of these things. As someone who reads a lot and monitors whats getting attention, my book is a lot better than other books you could be buying right now.
A reminder to please pre-order my book:
Pre-Order Now
Pre-Order Now
Brian Cox, who played Logan Roy in HBOs Succession, has said that in drama, The beginning is inevitable, the end is inevitable, but the middle is not so inevitable, and television is about the middle.
I know many readers have some inkling about my early life, and know how it all ends up. We are now in the middle, and the lessons Ive learned along the way.
I wanted to build a new life.
Throughout my final year of high school, I thought a lot about my friends and where we were all going. Cristian and John said they were going to turn it all around in community collegethey both planned to get good grades and then transfer to a four-year college. When they told me this plan, I thought about how we were C-minus students at best, and now that we were nearly adults, we would soon have more freedom. The marginal adult oversight we currently had would soon be nonexistent. Which meant we would go from a little bit of friction to none at all when we felt the urge to ditch class and do something reckless. Gradually, I realized the path I was on had nothing but a tragic ending and came to believe that the military was my only lifeline. It was an environment that would present maximal friction if I felt the urge to do something stupid. And it didnt hurt that enlisting would also provide a decent income. As I write this, Im reminded of a quote from George Orwell: The thought of not being poor made me very patriotic.
But I was nervous about enlisting.
A few years before, Aunt Bs son had graduated high school. He subsequently moved to Sacramento and started selling drugs for a local gang. He got into an altercation with a rival gang and wound up in the hospital. He realized he was not on a good path, and decided to join the military. The whole family was proud. Then at basic training, he punched one of the other recruits, tried to fight the drill instructor, and was subsequently kicked out. After that, he moved in with Aunt B and spent most of his days drinking on her couch. Aunt B begged him to get a job to no avail.
I wasnt entirely sure the military was the right option for me, but I knew the path I was currently on was definitely the wrong one. Enlisting seemed like a smart choice.
But I wasnt smart about how I went about it. I met with the Air Force recruiter and scheduled a date to take the ASVAB  the Armed Services Vocational Aptitude Battery, which is a standardized test similar to the SAT required for potential recruits. It tests math ability and reading comprehension, among other skills. This was the same test Tyler blew off when his grandma died. The night before the exam, I stayed up most of the night with John and Tom playing Xbox 360 and getting drunk on Four Loko. I knew that the test was scheduled for 10:30 in the morning, two hours later than when school started. I also knew the test was a valid excuse not to go to class. So with the extra two hours, plus an alibi, I didnt even think to get a good nights rest.
The following morning I woke up bleary-eyed. I checked the clock, and registered that I had just enough time to drive to the testing center. On the way there, I chugged a big can of Rockstar energy drink. I didnt know what to expect with this test, but figured a large dose of caffeine would help.
As I wrote my full name on the scantron and awaited further instructions from the test proctor, I thought about how Id grown up. I thought about the many families Id lived with, and what was left of my current family arrangement. I looked down at my last name: Henderson. Id seen enough movies to know that everyone in the military would call me primarily by this name. This sparked a sense of resentmentwhy did I get named after someone who wanted nothing to do with me? Upon further reflection, though, I realized that my whole life Id been called the name of another guyRobertwho had also abandoned me.
My whole life had been a series of adults making decisions for me: foster parents, doctors, therapists, and social workers. Id never had a say in the adoption, divorces and separations. Now, here I was, finally making my own decision about how my life would unfold, and I showed up hungover, exhausted, and hungry. Thats how much thought I gave to my future. Still, when thoughts about my past entered my mind, I felt more determined than ever. I gripped my No. 2 pencil and gave it my best effort.
Two weeks later, I met with my recruiter to review my exam results.
This is a great score, you qualify for every job, he said.
He showed me some charts, explaining how my results could be converted into SAT scores. I noticed that my SAT score, according to the charts, would have been the same as my straight-A classmate, Richard, who was heading off to college. A knot formed in my stomach as I considered what that meant  I might have gotten better grades if Id tried harder. But as things stood, I had a 2.2 GPA and was about to graduate in the bottom third of my high school class. I lied to myself that I didnt care that I hadnt done well. It was too late.Maybe someday Ill give school another try.
He showed me some charts, explaining how my results could be converted into SAT scores. I noticed that my SAT score, according to the charts, would have been the same as my straight-A classmate, Richard, who was heading off to college. A knot formed in my stomach as I considered what that meant  I might have gotten better grades if Id tried harder. But as things stood, I had a 2.2 GPA and was about to graduate in the bottom third of my high school class. I lied to myself that I didnt care that I hadnt done well. It was too late.
I graduated in June and was scheduled to ship out for basic training in August. I was still underage, and still buying cigarettes from older coworkers because I wasnt old enough to buy them at the gas station. Seventeen-year-olds can enlist, but they require consent from a parent or guardian. When my recruiter gave me the form, I briefly considered forging Moms signature, but I wanted to ask how she felt about my decision.
Mom expressed some concern, but not as much as Id anticipated.
Where else am I going to go? I asked her.
She conceded, I know youre going to go off to God knows where when youre an adult anyway. She had long sensed my desire to escape, and perhaps implicitly understood that I was either going to enlist or run away.
I arrived at Lackland Air Force Base, Texas, for basic training. This was before new recruits were allowed to use their cell phones, so my recruiter suggested that I take some quarters to use for the outdoor pay phones. The situation sort of reminded me of jail scenes on TV.
During the first week, everyone got one phone call. I had about ninety seconds to call Mom, hope she answered, tell her my mailing address, and hang up. Fortunately, she answered right away. All the while the instructors were pacing back and forth behind us telling us to hurry the hell up.
Throughout training, when it was safe, the other guys and I would laugh at how crazy the simulated stress was. I had only one tense moment where I was genuinely unsure what to do. The instructor for our flight (an Air Force military unit, roughly equivalent to a platoon) rewarded us after a particularly successful week of training by letting us write a letter to our families. I wrote a letter to my mom and sister, and, on my way to deliver the envelope to the mailbox outside, a different instructor stopped me. I recognized him as an instructor from another military unit in a different part of the squadron.
Where the hell do you think youre going, Trainee Henderson? He barked, looking at my name on my uniform.
Sir, Trainee Henderson reports as ordered, I responded. Sir, Im on my way to the mailbox.
He snatched the envelope from my hands. If you bring this anywhere near that mailbox, I will make sure you lose the capacity to write anything ever again, do you understand?
Yes, sir.
He handed the letter back to me. As he returned to his unit, I stood silently and considered my options. On the one hand, my instructor gave permission to mail the letter. On the other hand, I didnt want this other instructor to murder meor, more realistically, discipline me or possibly throw me out of the military. Was he serious about the letter, or was this a silly mind game? It was important to me to tell Mom and Hannah that I was okay. Theyd sent me several letters, so I figured I should try to send them this one, especially since I might not have another chance. Between my desire to contact my family and my propensity for risk taking, the choice was clear. I waited until the instructor could no longer see me, and made a beeline to the mailbox.
My favorite part of training was the camaraderie. I especially enjoyed drill and marching. The synchronized movement with others, moving as a single element, instilled a feeling of belonging. Everyone dressed the same, was held to the same expectations, and was treated on merit. I also enjoyed the physical training, obstacle courses, classes on military history and structure, and combat arms training. Considering what a poor student Id been in high school, I was surprised at how much I was enjoying this experience. The psychologist Joyce Benenson has written that, often, when a young male has been overlooked by his parents, he will gravitate to the ubiquitous male peer-militaristic world. He will then join this world as a child soldier, a gang member, mercenary, member of a militia, or, if he is lucky, a well-resourced military unit.
According to this logic, I was lucky.
Still, I didnt enjoy the tedious requirements for bed making, rolling and folding our clothesjustright, and ensuring there wasneverany dust or dirt visible in our living quarters.
Still, I didnt enjoy the tedious requirements for bed making, rolling and folding our clothes
right, and ensuring there was
any dust or dirt visible in our living quarters.
The guy in the bunk above me had a dad who was in the Navy. He explained that the reason for all this attention to detail is that it was all part of a test.
If they cant trust you to make a bed perfectly, how can they trust you to carry a weapon or repair multi-million-dollar equipment?
Contrary to my belief, I learned that the military is not just a destination for poor or working-class kids who join because their options are limited. The others werent like memost of the guys spoke of their excitement at the prospect of seeing their parents at the boot camp graduation ceremony. Many of them had been raised by two parents, and seemed to be on good terms with their families. Also surprising to me, around half the guys were older than 18, having spent some time working or studying before deciding to enlist. The oldest was 27 and had a bachelors degree. At age 17, I was the youngest of the 55 members of my flight, suggesting that I was in more of a hurry to leave home than most of them.
Following basic training, each new member was assigned to attend tech school, where we obtained additional training for our specific military occupations. I traveled to Keesler Air Force Base in Mississippi. Tech school was a slightly less prison-like existence than boot camp. We still had to wake up at 5:45am, we still had regular uniform inspections, and we had to march everywhere. From the hours of 0545 to 1900 (5:45 am to 7:00 pm), we were either in class, doing assignments, doing physical training, or practicing drill. The system was designed to keep us too busy and too exhausted to get into trouble. I looked forward to checking my mailbox on Fridays, where I would collect the latest DVDs Id ordered from Netflix to watch during the evenings and weekends. I watched a lot of episodes ofThe Officeduring this period.
Following basic training, each new member was assigned to attend tech school, where we obtained additional training for our specific military occupations. I traveled to Keesler Air Force Base in Mississippi. Tech school was a slightly less prison-like existence than boot camp. We still had to wake up at 5:45am, we still had regular uniform inspections, and we had to march everywhere. From the hours of 0545 to 1900 (5:45 am to 7:00 pm), we were either in class, doing assignments, doing physical training, or practicing drill. The system was designed to keep us too busy and too exhausted to get into trouble. I looked forward to checking my mailbox on Fridays, where I would collect the latest DVDs Id ordered from Netflix to watch during the evenings and weekends. I watched a lot of episodes of
during this period.
My occupation was highly technical, and required follow-on training at Sheppard Air Force Base in Texas. All of this training and moving led me to reflect on what I might do after the military. One of my new instructors provided some guidance. He was a quiet man, and looked young for his rank. One Friday afternoon he asked the class if we had any questions about military life.
I asked him, If you could do it all over again, would you still have enlisted?
The instructor paused for a few seconds, and replied, There are some misunderstandings, I think, about what the military can do. You should keep your expectations in line with reality. If you view the military as a job, you will be miserable. Its not a job, its a lot more than that. As long as you wear that uniform, it is your entire existence. The demands of this job will loom large in just about every decision you make in what you think of as your personal life. If you view the military as a club, you're also going to have a hard time. Its not some special affiliation you get to brag aboutthat mindset will hold you back. And if you're easily offended, you're going to be miserable, too. You need a thick skin. But if you see the military as a system to obtain as much experience, training, and knowledge as possible in order to advance in your life, then youll be fine. Understand that the Air Force is going to ask a lot from you. Just remember that you can get a lot in return from it, as well.
I meditated on this as I traveled to my first assigned duty station in Washington State, about forty miles from Seattle.
I began my official duties at McChord Air Force Base as an electronic warfare technician. I didnt have any special reason why I chose this occupation. When I reviewed what specialties were available with my recruiter, I simply selected the one that sounded the coolest to my seventeen year old mind. I hadnt yet formed a clear sense of myself and my interests, or a guiding principle for what I wanted in my life. I made the central choice of my lifeenlistingprimarily to get away from my past. Now, as usual, I was focused on the present and had little sense of the future.
I performed service checks on missile warning systems and other countermeasures devices installed on aircraft. These systems are intended to deter or jam projectiles seeking to destroy the airplanes. In practice, this meant regularly testing the equipment on board.
Here is a typical task. After pilots returned from a mission in Iraq or Afghanistan, I would walk 360 degrees around the aircraft and aim a special device at it that imitated the signals of a heat-seeking missile. Another technician in the flight deck (cock pit) would report to me via radio whether the radar installed in the airplane registered the signal, which indicated that the system was working as intended. My counterpart would then test whether the system responded to the incoming missile by emitting another signal which matched the heat signature of the airplane. This signal would divert the missile in another direction, thus preserving the aircraft. Every jet required these maintenance checks every 90 days. There were plenty of other tasks, too, like replacing old devices with new ones, or uploading new software onto the existing systems.
Many military jobs are similar to civilian nine-to-fives, except longer and more unpredictable. I always tried to be the first one to arrive at work and the last one to leave. Grateful to have found a new path in life surrounded by driven people, I threw myself into the job. New members were given 15 months to complete their training requirements to be fully qualified to work without oversight; I completed them in six months. In addition to on-the-job training, we had to take a systems knowledge exam, and I obtained the highest score in my cohort.
As a kid, I was weighed down by instability and hopelessness. The military helped to unlock my potential, because it provided a structured environment, a sharp contrast with the drama and disorder of my youth. I was surrounded by supportive people who wanted me to succeed. In this new environment, I gradually came to realize that my childhood was anomalous, and I didnt have to let it define the rest of my life. Id been liberated from the mistakes of my past. I believed that the external comportment I had cultivated would allow me to control my internal demons and productively channel my restless energy.
I would probably have committed at least one felony had I not been locked in the military throughout these years. For behaviors and habits to be stable and predictable, ones environment needs to be stable and predictable. I didnt have discipline, mentorship, healthy camaraderie, and so on back home, but I had them now. My new, highly rigid environmental constraints kept me out of trouble.
But there was something else too: Time. In a very real way, simply being confined to a schedule kept me out of trouble. Military life consists of physical training (PT), room inspections, uniform inspections, and mandatory tasks outside of standard work hours. Every aspect of existence is tightly regulated, and this is especially true for new recruits. Your life isnt really yours. No institution is more aware of the latent impulsivity and stupidity in young people, especially young men, than the military. It has evolved into an environment in which it is very hard to do something reckless, because the consequences of failing to meet standards are both clear and severe. Major infractions like not showing up for work or failing a random drug test result in literal jail time.
I learned that so much of success depends not on what people do, but what they dont do. Its about avoiding rash and reckless actions that will land us in trouble. The military presses the fast forward button on the worst, most aggressive, and impulsive years of a young mans lifethe time when a guy is most likely to do something catastrophically stupid. Studies have found that a mans likelihood of committing a crime peaks at age nineteen, and then gradually declines throughout his twenties. This has led some psychologists to describe their larger appetite for violence, risk taking, and competitiveness as the young male syndrome.
For me, the military presented a clear juxtaposition with ordinary civilian life, where a misguided teenager can gain plenty of ground on the path to self-destruction before slamming headfirst into a wall of consequences. You can commit a lot of crimes before finally getting caught. You can do a lot of drugs before they start to take over your life. You can have a lot of hookups before confronting the consequences of pregnancy. For many young people, the gap between impulsive and unwise decisions and the consequences of those decisions is large. In the military, there is almost no gap at all.
Even if a young man learns absolutely nothing during a military enlistment, thats still four to six years he spent simply staying out of trouble and letting his brain develop; the same guy at twenty-four is rarely as reckless and impulsive as he was at 18. The reason my life didnt go off the rails is because I wasjustself-aware enough to decide to have my choices stripped from me.
Even if a young man learns absolutely nothing during a military enlistment, thats still four to six years he spent simply staying out of trouble and letting his brain develop; the same guy at twenty-four is rarely as reckless and impulsive as he was at 18. The reason my life didnt go off the rails is because I was
self-aware enough to decide to have my choices stripped from me.
But I still found ways to bend the rules.
I lived on the second floor of a building on base. Life in military quarters is not particularly exciting. We were required to live within them until we reached a certain rank, typically achieved after about three years, at which point we could choose our own place to live off-base. This is by design, so that young members could be easily supervised and kept out of trouble. We had to take our meals at the Dining Facility (we called it the D-FAC). I was amazed the first time I visited for breakfast and saw real Pop-Tarts. Its a small thing, but at my high school Pop-Tarts were a prized commodity. Mom and Shelly would buy the Great Value generic ones from Wal-Mart. But now I could get name-brand snacks in all-you-can-eat quantities. No one else seemed fazed by it.
One day Id just finished PT when I heard some music blaring in the room next to me. It was a new song, LAX Files by The Game. I recognized that music because I knew The Game was from L.A. I walked out onto the balcony to smokeI was now eighteen and could, at last, legally pay for the risk of lung cancer. Technically, we were supposed to smoke at the designated tobacco use area, colloquially called a smoke pit, but the more careless guys (like me) didnt bother. I saw a guy standing out on the balcony too, right in front of the room playing the loud music. Also a smoker, he lit a cigarette and I asked if that was his music.
Yeah man, I love The Game, he said.
Hes from L.A., I replied.
Yep, Cali. Me too. He introduced himself with his last name, Curtis, and I told him my last name, too.
I read that Texas and California are overrepresented in the military. Those two states account for a ton of enlistments, I said.
Yeah, makes sense, theyre big states bro.
How did you end up joining? I asked. It was one of the more common questions newbies asked to get to know one another.
Curtis paused, looking sheepish. Ah, fuck it, Ill just tell you. I played baseball at UC Santa Barbara. My coach found us doing coke in the locker room after practice. Some other stuff happened too, but that was really the main thing. I dropped out, did some other dumb shit. I worked at a golf course, and usually got high on the jobweed, not coke. Anyway, my mom and dad were like you cant keep doing this, Curtis wagged his finger in the air and raised his pitch, sounding like a cartoon character. You have to go back to college! Or join the military! Or something! No more smoking dope and fucking around at the golf course!
I laughed. So you joined because of your parents?
Sort of. I think they were joking about the military because my mom almost lost it when I told them Id enlisted. My dad thought it was chill though. I just didnt want to disappoint them anymore.
This is a great story, was my first thought. I saw some parallels in how we ended up enlisting to correct the course of our lives.This guys parents are together, was my second. In fact, I noticed more often than not, the parents of my coworkers were married, which was a sharp contrast to the people I grew up with.
, was my first thought. I saw some parallels in how we ended up enlisting to correct the course of our lives.
, was my second. In fact, I noticed more often than not, the parents of my coworkers were married, which was a sharp contrast to the people I grew up with.
The song switched to Day N Night by Kid Cudi.
Yeah, makes sense, I replied. Are you glad you enlisted?
I dont know man. Im twenty-one, so there are people my age who outrank me now, you know? Youre younger than me, most likely.
I turned eighteen in tech school, I said.
I mean, I was a fucking slacker in college. If Id given college and baseball even half the effort I gave in boot camp and tech school, I never would have had to enlist in the first place.
That applied to my situation in high school, too. Still, I was glad to have enlisted. I liked that I was physically, if not mentally, separated from my past.
Curtis and I continued to make small talk about the ways our lives were the same and different. Later that evening, Curtis bought some beer for us and we introduced ourselves to some other guys in the dorms.
Before I joined, Id heard that the military basically becomes your parent. I found this to be true. They teach you about finance and budgeting, and supervisors would lead new guys away from doing stupid things like blowing an entire paycheck on a brand-new sports car. Instead, theyd say to buy a sensible car. Some of the guys didnt listen, though. New members made about thirteen hundred bucks a month. It wasnt much, but it was more than Id ever made before.
While military life was demanding, my efforts paid off. Many people say that to do something difficult and worthwhile, they need to be motivated. Or that the reason they are not sticking to their goals is because they lack motivation. But the military taught me that people dont need motivation, they need self-discipline. Motivation is just a feeling. Self-discipline is: I'm going to do this regardless of how I feel. Seldom do people relish doing something hard. Often, what divides the successful from unsuccessful is doing what you dont feel motivated to do.
One day my supervisor informed me that he had something serious to tell me. I wasnt sure what it was aboutmaybe hed heard that Id been drinking in the dorms with Curtis and some of the other guys?
Shut the door, Henderson.
Yes, sir. I closed the door and waited.
Were going to request that you be given an early promotion, he said.
He described the below the zone early promotion program, intended only for the top 15 percent of new Airmen. Only high performers are eligible, he explained. Other applicants were being considered, he said, but he believed I would be a competitive candidate.
How old are you, Airman Henderson?
Ill be twenty soon.
Thats pretty damn young. Most people are at least drinking age before they reach E-4. Look, this promotion means you would carry more responsibilities, my supervisor said. I think you can handle it. What do you think?
I think so, sir, I said. I was actually not sure that I thought so, but I could tell he had confidence in me, which bolstered my own. I knew I was excelling at the job, but still couldnt believe I was being considered for this.
More responsibilities mean more money, too he said.
I actually looked at the updated pay charts recently; I think it would be almost 200 dollars more a month.
Just dont do some stupid shit like buy a Mustang off the lot like some of these morons.
I was thinking a Dodge Viper, I joked.
Haha, he replied dryly. Now go do some work.
Weeks later, our squadron commander approved my application, and I was promoted six months ahead of schedule.
My promotion allowed me to move off-base and get a house with Curtis and a couple other guys too, so four of us split the rent in a large two-story house. Curtiss parents came up to Washington to help us move into our new place. His parents rented a truck, which was helpful to move the furniture wed bought for the living room. Id been around friends who had more normal family lives than the one I had. But being around Curtis and his family crystallized something that I had always sensed but never quite realized: my life up to this point had been something of an obstacle course. I thought about how well Id done in middle school, and how poorly Id done in high school. There were a few reasons for thisinstability, anger at how messed up my life had been, wanting to impress my friends and the ease of doing something fun rather than something difficult, especially when no one had expected anything of me.
After we moved everything in, his parents went back to their hotel room, and Curtis and I hung out in the kitchen and cracked open a few beers.
Your parents seem nice, man, I said.
Theyre alright, he replied. My dad used to be a real asshole, but hes mellowed out since I enlisted. You know how it is.
We should get a beer pong table for the backyard, I said, trying to sidestep any discussion of my family.
Hell yeah. And a flatscreen, he nodded toward the living room, where our other roommate, Dominguez, was playing Guitar Hero. Sweet Child O' Mine by Guns N' Roses blared through the speakers of the 32-inch Panasonic tube TV that we bought for 20 bucks from the previous tenants.
Curtis and, later, Dom, always kept our house supplied with booze. It was basically a sadder version of a frat house. We had parties every couple weeks, but it was mostly a bunch of dudes we knew from work getting drunk, playing beer pong and video games. Practically monastic for those of us under the age of twenty-one.
Curtis, though, was the oldest of the housemates and soon began dating a girl hed met at a bar.
She invited Curtis, Dom, and me to a Halloween party in Tacoma. The house was packed with around thirty people, with another forty or so outside. While Curtis talked to his girlfriend, I walked into the backyard and saw a DJ standing on a small stage. Forever by Drake was playing.
He grabbed a microphone and said, Okay, who wants to be tased? and he pulled out a taser.
I looked at a guy standing next me. Is this guy serious? I asked.
Yeah, I think so, he replied.
A guy in a red Tapout shirt wearing a Batman mask and cape raised his hand and said, Tase me! Tase me!
The guy on stage then said, Okay, we have a taker. Who wants to tase him?
A girl walked over and took the taser from him. She aimed it right at Batman and fired. It was kind of like that scene from the Hangover movie. The taser hit him right in the chest and he fell over twitching. His friends circled around him, helping him up. The girl dropped the taser, laughing, and disappeared into the crowd.
About an hour later, Batman challenged Curtis to a game of beer pong  Curtis and Dominguez on one side; Batman and his friend on the other. The trash talk started out good natured, but Batmans remarks were growing increasingly snide as Curtis got closer to winning. After a few rounds, Curtis landed his ball in the other sides cup, securing victory.
Batman then said, Bet you had a lot of practice with those dainty little fingers.
Curtis got in his face. Whats your fucking problem?
Trying to defuse the situation, I put my hand on Curtiss shoulder and whispered, This guy literally volunteered to get tased. I dont think its a great idea to get into a fight with him.
Okay, we should get going anyway, Curtis said.
Okay, we should get going anyway, Batman mocked him.
Against my better judgment, I made a stupid joke: Is that taser still around? Might be time to use it again.
Batman shoved me. I responded by hitting him in his right eye. He stepped backwards onto his cape, stumbled over a chair, and fell straight through a glass coffee table.
I was in that interim stage where I was mature enough to give Curtis good advice, but not wise enough to take it myself. I was still an impulsive, insecure kid and wanted to be tough at someone elses expense.
Okay! Curtis announced as Batman rolled in broken glass. Time to get out of here!
Of course he tripped over his cape, Dominguez said. I knew that Christian Bale movie was bullshit. Wed just watched The Dark Knight on Blu-ray a few days prior.
As we walked outside, I heard Curtis whispering to his girlfriend how sorry he was and that hed cover the cost of the table.
Ill pay for it, I said. Sorry about what happened back there.
Its all good. If you hadnt knocked that dude out, I would have, he replied.
The military asked that I put myself in the service for something higher than myself. I had a seriousness of purpose which I lacked before, and experienced a new feeling about who I was and who I could be in life. But it didnt fundamentally transform me. It just provided conditions that prevented me from acting out the way I had as a kid.
Enlisting provided a stable setting that allowed me to mature enough to start reflecting on my life, and what I had gone through. I still held some residual anxiety and rage from my upbringing. Despite the complete change in my circumstances,Ihad not completely changed. There was a lingering sense that something wasnt rightI was still running from something.
Enlisting provided a stable setting that allowed me to mature enough to start reflecting on my life, and what I had gone through. I still held some residual anxiety and rage from my upbringing. Despite the complete change in my circumstances,
had not completely changed. There was a lingering sense that something wasnt rightI was still running from something.
The military improved my life in a lot of ways. But I was still who I was and a product of where I came from. I sought ways to stifle any sense of emotional feeling within me. Having my wisdom teeth pulled provided a great opportunity to do that. The doctors prescribed far more Norco pills than I needed for recovery. I enjoyed them so much that when I heard that the same meds were prescribed for corrective eye surgery a year later, I immediately put my name on the list for the procedure. I told myself it was because I hated wearing contact lenses.
Upon recovery from the procedure, I made plans to visit California for my sisters seventeenth birthday.
In Red Bluff during the summertime, young people take inflatable inner tubes and floating rafts out on the Sacramento River. So for Hannahs birthday, we arranged to go floating and reserved one tube for a portable speaker and a cooler full of drinks. We invited a few of her friends to join us, and I invited Tom, who was currently unemployed and taking one class at a nearby community college.
As we floated along the Sacramento River, Hannah repeatedly said to everyone, Okay, lets just make sure we get back by four oclock, because I have to pick up my boyfriend at a bus stop near Chico. This was a forty-five minute drive from Red Bluff.
The third time she made this announcement, I set my beer down and said, Why is he taking a bus? This dude doesnt have a car?
While not unheard of, it wasnt especially common for young people in Red Bluff and Chico to take buses. I knew Hannahs boyfriend worked part time at a coffee shop, and figured he must have his own means of transportation.
He cant drive right nowhe was just visiting his friend for a few days in Yuba City and took a bus.
Cant drive?I sensed my sister wasnt being entirely forthcoming, but I brushed the thought aside and opened another beer.
I sensed my sister wasnt being entirely forthcoming, but I brushed the thought aside and opened another beer.
As we approached 4pm, Hannahs friend reached into the ice chest and, in the process, accidentally knocked Toms car keys in the river. As soon as the keys hit the water, I saw the look of shock on Toms face. The current was strong and the river was deepin other words, there was no getting those keys back. Tom was drunk, and we spent more than an hour with him in a parking lot by the river before finding a solution to get him another set of keys. In the meantime, Hannah was stressing about the fact that we would be at least an hour late to pick up her boyfriend.
Hannah and I got in her car and she sped toward Chico. Tom, who wouldnt get his new set of keys until the following day, tagged along with us.
Oh my God, hes going to be so upset. I hope hes okay, my sister said.
Whats the big dealcant he just call a taxi? I asked.
Hannah gave me the side-eye.
What? I asked. This guy doesnt seem like a winner, Hannah. Mom told me that when she took you guys to dinner with her and her friends at the Sierra Nevada Brewery, you asked if your boyfriend could get a beer. Then he kept ordering more, and Mom paid for like five beers?
Hannah remained silent.
Tom had been drinking and cracking jokes in the back seat. Beers at Sierra Nevada arent cheap. Your mom paid like fifty bucks for him to get a buzz. Here I am, buzzed on like ten bucks worth of Natty.
Shut up, Tom, I said.
There are so many losers around here, he replied. Trust me, I know. I feel bad for your sister, Rob. Shes not gonna find Prince Charming making nine bucks an hour in Red Bluff.
So thats the issue then, I suggested. He cant afford a car so he takes the bus?
No! Hannah said. Fine. If you really must know. He wasnt at his friends in Yuba City. She took a breath, and said, He was in jail, just for a few days.
Tom leaned between us, looked right at me, and blurted, Well that escalated quickly! I glared at him but then we both started laughing.
Why was he in jail? I asked, concerned about this guy my sister was dating.
He was driving, Hannah said, And we got pulled over because one of his taillights was out. The cops gave him a breathalyzer. Hed only had a few drinks, but it wasnt his first DUI. They told him he could either pay a fine or spend a few days in jail.
Jesus Christ. Youre dating inmates now. Then after a pause, Okay, lets see if hes alright then. I knew my sister could do better. But I also considered Toms comment, about the crop of guys available to choose from. Her boyfriend wasnt in college, barely employed, likely had a drinking problem, and had no plans for his future.
Five months later, I was relieved when my sister declared that she split with him.
Shortly after my sister had told me about her recent breakup, John called me. He still lived in Red Bluff and had recently moved into an apartment with Cristian.
Whats up man? I asked.
We caught up for a few minutes, and he told me hed been enrolled in classes at a nearby community college.
Whats the plan, when do you transfer?
I failed my last class, so I have to retake it. I missed too many lectures and couldnt catch up on the reading, but thats okay, Ill make it up next semester.
This was a common line. Community college creates a holding pattern, where people can take and retake classes for years with some pie-in-the-sky dream of transferring to a four-year college. Seventy percent of community college students in California never complete their programs.
Listen, John said. Tylers in serious trouble.
What happened? I was concerned, but not surprised. Ever since Tyler kicked that dog off a cliff back in high school, Id figured his life would eventually go off the rails.
Tyler was drunk on his motorcycle with one of his dealer friends on the backon their way back from delivering drugs. He was completely hammered, speeding on the 505 when the cops tried to pull him over. He led them on a chase for a few minutes before swerving and crashing. He got scraped up pretty bad, but the other guy cracked his skull.
Jesus. So Tylers okay and the other guy iswhat? Tyler had had multiple run-ins with the cops and had spent more than one night in the drunk tank.
Tyler seems fine. But the other guy was in a coma for a while, not sure what the situation is now. Anyway, dude, Tyler is going to San Quentin. Fucking state prison.
I paused, trying to process this. I hadnt talked to Tyler much since high school, but Id long assumed this was the path he was on. It was the one I was on before I left, too.  if you replayed the circumstances of my early life repeatedly, nine times out of ten I suspect I wouldve wound up in prison, too.
In 2012, I was assigned to deploy to Al Udeid Air Base, Qatar, with a team of other guys in my unit. Our itinerary: Fly out of Washington State, overnight layover in Baltimore, then a flight to Qatar, where we would be stationed for the next four to six months. On the way to the airport, I stopped by a bookstore and picked up a copy ofHow the Mind Worksby the Harvard psychologist Steven Pinker. The title caught my eye, and I thoughtHey, how does the mind work, actually?
In 2012, I was assigned to deploy to Al Udeid Air Base, Qatar, with a team of other guys in my unit. Our itinerary: Fly out of Washington State, overnight layover in Baltimore, then a flight to Qatar, where we would be stationed for the next four to six months. On the way to the airport, I stopped by a bookstore and picked up a copy of
by the Harvard psychologist Steven Pinker. The title caught my eye, and I thought
When I wasnt working or screwing around with Curtis and Dom, Id be in my bedroom reading. Id readMans Search for Meaningby Viktor Frankl, and was moved by his observation that although his fellow prisoners in a Nazi concentration camp were in the worst environment imaginable, they responded to it in radically different ways. Some were primarily self-centered in their quest for survival, while others became selfless and sacrificed for others at great risk to themselves. I also readThe Autobiography of Malcolm Xand, though my situation was drastically different from the authors, his anger at society resonated with me.
When I wasnt working or screwing around with Curtis and Dom, Id be in my bedroom reading. Id read
by Viktor Frankl, and was moved by his observation that although his fellow prisoners in a Nazi concentration camp were in the worst environment imaginable, they responded to it in radically different ways. Some were primarily self-centered in their quest for survival, while others became selfless and sacrificed for others at great risk to themselves. I also read
and, though my situation was drastically different from the authors, his anger at society resonated with me.
But this book about the mind was different. I flipped through it on the flight to Baltimore and found that it referenced Calvin and Hobbes. I loved these comics as a kid, and, in one amusing passage, Pinker describes a scene from the comic in which Hobbes, Calvins pet tiger, mocks humans for having no fangs, no claws, no fur, and poor reflexes. And yet, the book explained, it is humans who control the fate of tigers rather than vice versa. This is because of our brainpower, which evolved just like every other trait. Human evolution, Pinker wrote, is the original revenge of the nerds. This helped awaken my interest in studying human nature.
In another memorable passage, Professor Pinker describes how across cultures and time, people strive for a ghostly substance called authority, cachet, dignity, dominance, eminence, esteem, face, position, preeminence, prestige, rank, regard, repute, respect, standing, stature, or status. I thought about how happy I was to make my family proud when Id enlisted. Now I was learning that this pleasure had its origins in the fundamental human longing for acceptance.
How the Mind Workswas the only book I brought with me overseas. This was also the era of easy torrenting, so I knew I wouldnt be bored. My coworkers warned me that during deployment, the only things you could do when you werent on duty were either work out, read books, or watch movies. To prepare, I downloaded the entire series ofThe Sopranos tomy bulky Sony laptop. The episodes had those sketchy pirated labels like TheSopranosS01E01.DVDRip.avi. After a long shift, Id go straight to the gym to lift with my coworkers or go for a run. Then, after a shower, Id either read books or watch an episode ofThe Sopranos. This show confirmed a message Id seen in other showscollege was an important ingredient of success.
was the only book I brought with me overseas. This was also the era of easy torrenting, so I knew I wouldnt be bored. My coworkers warned me that during deployment, the only things you could do when you werent on duty were either work out, read books, or watch movies. To prepare, I downloaded the entire series of
my bulky Sony laptop. The episodes had those sketchy pirated labels like TheSopranosS01E01.DVDRip.avi. After a long shift, Id go straight to the gym to lift with my coworkers or go for a run. Then, after a shower, Id either read books or watch an episode of
. This show confirmed a message Id seen in other showscollege was an important ingredient of success.
Early in the series, Carmela Soprano issues a thinly veiled threat to their neighbor, Jeannie Cusamano. Carmelas aim was to pressure Jeannie into getting her sister, a Georgetown alumna, to write a letter of recommendation for Carmelas daughter, Meadow, for Georgetown University. Neither Carmela nor her husband Tony graduated from college and neither had a strong network of college-educated friends and family. This one neighborly connection with Jeannie is Carmelas only in to the inaccessible world of prestigious colleges she desperately wants for her daughter so that she can escape their criminal family. Later, Meadow gets into Columbia University, and Carmela and Tony beam when one of their friends compliments them upon learning about this news.
I found it odd that even for this crime family, it was crucial that their daughter get into a good college. Tony Soprano wanted to fit in with the affluent doctors and lawyers in his neighborhood. But they treated him as a curiosity, cracking jokes and asking him about John Gotti during their golf outings.
I watched this show closely, feeling more conflicted than ever about college and my future. I was beginning to find my military job unfulfilling, yet also felt unprepared for college.
We referred affectionately to Al Udeid as The Deid (pronounced deed). As in, Im doing The Deid for the next six months. The base looked like what youd expect. Lots of sand, warm and arid weather, large tents and makeshift buildings. It was constantly windy, which blasted sand and dust everywhere. On particularly windy days, we had to wear face coverings to prevent sand particles from entering our lungs. Somehow, no matter how thoroughly I showered and how well I cleaned my living quarters, there was always sand in my bedsheets.
In the middle of a long night shift, I walked to the smoke pit, the designated area for tobacco users. Smoking, chewing tobacco, snus, coffee, and energy drinks were deployment-fuel for the sleep-deprived. Id been smoking regularly ever since my dishwashing job. It was a mental vacation from tedious labor. It broke up a workday into manageable chunks.So Ive smoked four cigarettes; when I have six left that means Ill be off. Id just finished up repairing a jet full of caskets draped in American flags. Casualties of war.
In the middle of a long night shift, I walked to the smoke pit, the designated area for tobacco users. Smoking, chewing tobacco, snus, coffee, and energy drinks were deployment-fuel for the sleep-deprived. Id been smoking regularly ever since my dishwashing job. It was a mental vacation from tedious labor. It broke up a workday into manageable chunks.
. Id just finished up repairing a jet full of caskets draped in American flags. Casualties of war.
A senior NCO was at the pit too, smoking and gazing at the sun rising over the flight line. He looked over at me.
Henderson, whats your plan?
Uh, just to finish this cigarette and get back to work, I replied.
No. What is your long-term planwhat are you doing with your life? he asked.
Oh, Im not sure. Maybe college?
Yeah, thats what everyone says, he replied.
What do you mean? I asked.
Look, a lot of people say theyre going to separate and think theyre going to live that sweet college life, get a degree, get a high-paying job, live happily ever after.
I do hear that a lotyou dont think its a good plan? I wasnt sure where he was going with this, and thought maybe he was going to try to talk me into re-enlisting.
Nothings wrong with it, obviously. Problem is, its just talk, he made the yapping gesture with his hand. Ive been around long enough to see it. Kid your age gets out, fucks around in community college or some online college for a year or two, and never graduates. To be honest, Id prefer you get the degree and come back as an officer. You could run a squadron someday.
I didnt know how to respond to this. Every so often my coworkers would make these kinds of remarks, and the comments embarrassed me. My roommates would crack jokes about me being smartpoking fun about my exam scores, early promotions, the stacks of books in my bedroom. I always viewed them as jokesI didnt want to be thought of as smart. I didnt see myself in that way. Some part of me rebelled against that image, because if it was trueif I was smartthen I might have to raise my sights for my life. I didnt have any long-term goals and I didnt want them. I didnt want to think about where my life was going. For the time being, despite my growing dissatisfaction with my job, I liked that the military made all my choices for me, and I could just cruise through each day on autopilot.
After I returned stateside from my deployment, I went on leave to visit California. I met up with Tyler and Tom at a bar in Vallejo. Tyler had served 12 months of his 18-month sentence in San Quentin. He was released early and now on parole. The passenger from his motorcycle accident had survived. By this point, Tyler had been out for nearly a year. We spent a few minutes joking around when he asked me about the military.
I told him a little about it and he replied, Basic training does actually sound kind of like prison.
So we both had to do time, didnt we? I said.
Tyler paused and said, Ihadto be locked up, he said. Youchoseto be.
Tyler paused and said, I
to be locked up, he said. You
to be.
He ordered another beer. I figured by now you would have given up drinking, I said.
Eh, its whatever. I can handle a couple of beers, he replied. Youre the one who suggested we meet at a bar.
What was prison like? I asked.
Boring, mostly. It was the same shit every day. Get up early as fuck, and there was a sort of roll call. Then wed have breakfast and watch TV for a while. Then wed have another headcount. Then Id read car magazines or play board games or whatever. Sometimes more TV, and sometimes work out. They actually started letting me run workout sessions with the other inmates. That was pretty much it, man. Eating, reading, working outits fucking tedious. Your whole existence is controlled. Even the lights. Sometimes fights and shit would break out, which broke up the boredom.
Sounds mind numbing, I said.
Having no privacy was the worst part, Tyler replied. Cant even jack off in peace.
Tom suddenly said, Tyler, show Rob your tattoo.
I laughed. No way. You got a prison tattoo?
Tyler stood up and lifted his shirt. Sprawled across his chiseled abdomen was a flaming skull. The other inmates made me get this, I didnt have a choice.
Itwasyour choice, in a way, Tom said to Tyler. You wouldnt have had to get it if you hadnt gone to prison.
It
your choice, in a way, Tom said to Tyler. You wouldnt have had to get it if you hadnt gone to prison.
I looked at Tyler, but this comment didnt seem to bother him.
Whatever, maybe it was a choice. It could have been worse, Tyler shrugged. I saw some really fucked up tattoos in there.
Whats next for you, man? I asked. I know you were making decent money at that car rental place before.
Tyler hesitated. I could tell he didnt want to talk about his employment prospects.
No place like that is going to hire me now, he said. I got an interview for carpet cleaning next week. Gotta start somewhere, you know. How about you, man?
I got ordersthey want me to re-enlist and move to Germany.
Tom turned toward me, Dude thats awesome. My dad says the beer is way better over there, he held up his glass.
Rob, you made it, Tyler said. You keep moving farther away. I dont blame you.
He was rightsome part of me liked the idea of increasing the physical distance between myself and where Id come from. On some level, I believed that if where I wasgoingwas far enough, it could change where I hadbeen.
He was rightsome part of me liked the idea of increasing the physical distance between myself and where Id come from. On some level, I believed that if where I was
was far enough, it could change where I had
.
Tyler tapped my glass with his drink.
I lifted my glass for a toast, saying I hoped Tyler would remain a free man.
Well, life was simpler in there, Tyler said. Sometimes, and I know this sounds crazy, but I wish I could go back.
I re-enlisted and moved to Germany. Months later, Tyler was arrested for driving while intoxicated. When I heard the news, I had the feeling that this time hed chosen prison.
In Germany, I realized that my twenty-two year old self was living a life that my 17-year-old self had chosen. My occupational duties were confining, and I had begun to experience intense bouts of loneliness and alienation. I felt that something was missing or wrong in my life, and that some change was needed to make it worthwhile. Work was often busy enough that it occupied my mind and kept these questions at bay. But when I wasnt working, they were harder to control, and I turned to drinking to subdue my uncertainty and anxieties. The military ceased to feel like an oasis and started to actually feel like a prison.
Id been in a relationship for a few months with a girl who studied at a nearby university when she invited me to have dinner with her family. We were eating a potato dish that her mother had prepared, and at the dinner table I noticed that she was shooting me odd looks as I ate. My girlfriend saw this too, and leaned over and whispered to me, You should use your knife. I looked down and realized Id been cutting my food with the side of my fork. Id always eaten that way, first in foster homes and then later with Mom, who used her cutlery the same way. No one had told me it was improper.
Using my right hand, I carefully cut my food, and then switched utensils to use my right hand to eat with my fork. As I continued to exchange my fork and my knife in my right hand, almost certain that I was doing something wrong, I wondered what my girlfriends mother was thinking.Does she think I dont know how to use a knife? Does she think I grew up poor and that I never learned proper table manners? Maybe this is simply a cultural difference, and Americans and Germans eat differently. Was this an issue of class, or culture, or simply a personal quirk?
Using my right hand, I carefully cut my food, and then switched utensils to use my right hand to eat with my fork. As I continued to exchange my fork and my knife in my right hand, almost certain that I was doing something wrong, I wondered what my girlfriends mother was thinking.
. Was this an issue of class, or culture, or simply a personal quirk?
They asked me whether Id be traveling home to the U.S. for the upcoming Christmas. I paused, realizing that I hadnt visited home for the holidays in six years. I always told my family it was because I had to work. The military was always the perfect excuse. But it wasnt trueplenty of people visited home for Christmas but I chose not to.
Im not sure, I replied. I might have to work.
I was promoted yet again, and given more responsibility. My professional life was going well, but my inner life was deteriorating. When Id initially left home, I did very little questioning or searching with regard to my life. I was in flight mode, grateful to have left home and found something to occupy myself. For the first couple of years, Id been untroubled by difficult questions about the meaning of my past and the direction of my future. Lately, though, Id been reappraising everything Id gone through. The little kid who was betrayed over and over by parental figures and himself was suddenly seeking expression and validation. It felt like these internal conflicts had come out of nowhere. But the truth was theyd always been there, dormant, waiting until my environment was stable enough for me to process them. The stress Id muted for years was now demanding to be heard.
I should have listened to these feelings. Instead, I just drank more. I hung out with my friends and would black out to the point where I didnt remember most weekends. When we went out at night, Id tell my friends I was going to the bathroom. Then Id sneak over to the bar and ask the bartender for a few shots. Theyd naturally assume it was for a group. Id then pound them one after the other and return to my friends like nothing had happened. On other occasions, my girlfriend would come over to my apartment and Id drink so much Id pass out. When I woke up, shed be gone. I always felt lonely, even though I was seldom alone. Occasionally, Id think about quitting drinking. But I always found a way to make excuses.Havent I been through enoughI cant have a few drinks?It was easy to think about how bad my life had been, and how I deserved to drown my feelings away.
I should have listened to these feelings. Instead, I just drank more. I hung out with my friends and would black out to the point where I didnt remember most weekends. When we went out at night, Id tell my friends I was going to the bathroom. Then Id sneak over to the bar and ask the bartender for a few shots. Theyd naturally assume it was for a group. Id then pound them one after the other and return to my friends like nothing had happened. On other occasions, my girlfriend would come over to my apartment and Id drink so much Id pass out. When I woke up, shed be gone. I always felt lonely, even though I was seldom alone. Occasionally, Id think about quitting drinking. But I always found a way to make excuses.
It was easy to think about how bad my life had been, and how I deserved to drown my feelings away.
My environments suppressed and exposed different aspects of my nature. My childhood experiences inhibited my potential and fostered harmful instincts. Occasionally, though, my latent potential would shine through even in the midst of all that disorder. The military, in contrast, inhibited my destructive impulses and cultivated my good qualities. But now, the darkness within me sought expression. Being in a bad environment doesnt eliminate all the good parts of you, and being in a good environment doesnt eliminate all the bad parts of you.Who is the real me?I felt beset by contradictions, and had no answers.
My environments suppressed and exposed different aspects of my nature. My childhood experiences inhibited my potential and fostered harmful instincts. Occasionally, though, my latent potential would shine through even in the midst of all that disorder. The military, in contrast, inhibited my destructive impulses and cultivated my good qualities. But now, the darkness within me sought expression. Being in a bad environment doesnt eliminate all the good parts of you, and being in a good environment doesnt eliminate all the bad parts of you.
I felt beset by contradictions, and had no answers.
The holidays passed, and I regretted not visiting home. Out of guilt I bought a ticket to California and looked forward to catching up with Hannah and my friends.
I was in Red Bluff visiting John and Tom, the brothers who I lived with in high school. Wed been hanging out for a few hours catching up and listening to music. Sad Eyed Lady of the Lowlife by Alabama 3 was playing in the background. I pulled out my phone and noticed seven missed calls from my sister. I knew her dad and stepmom (Gary had remarried) were out of town, and that she was staying at their house in Red Bluff by herself. She rarely called so many times in a row, so something was obviously wrong. I was worried.
She picked up right away. Ive been trying to get ahold of you for like the past half hour, she said. It sounded like she was crying.
Is everything okay? I said, standing up.
Im at home. Its an emergency. Can you come?
Yeah, okay, I said.
I hung up and looked at my friends.
Im gonna go check on Hannah, shes in some kind of trouble, I said, reaching for my car keys.
John shot a glance at Tom, who shrugged.
I drove down the street where Hannah was staying and saw two police cars with their lights flashing parked directly in front of the house. There were two cops standing on the porch by the door. I stepped out of my car.
As I approached the house, the cops locked eyes with me.
Are you Robert Henderson?
Please write a short review/reaction andpost it here on this form. Or, if you prefer, you can also email me your review (rob@robkhenderson.com).
Please write a short review/reaction and
. Or, if you prefer, you can also email me your review (rob@robkhenderson.com).
I want to end this series of Substack serializations on a high note. Ill likely only post one more chapter here on my Substack before the book is published on Feb 20. The next chapter (Chapter Eight) is heavy, culminating with me waking up in a hospital ICU and subsequently checking into rehab. Ive never written publicly about that before. There is a good chance Im not going to post that one and will skip ahead and post Chapter Ten, when I arrive at Yale. That Yale chapter is more fun anyway, and it will give you a sense of what the final third of the book is like. If you want to know what happens when I arrive to see my sister, my experiences at rehab, my full observations and analysis of the luxury belief class, and how the book concludes, you gotta buy the book (or get a copy at your local library).
Pre-Order Your Copy of Troubled
Pre-Order Your Copy of Troubled
Comments
Restacks
Barry
Barry
Jan 18, 2024
Oh man! Left me hangin"!
Oh man! Left me hangin"!
I find myself strongly identifying with so many aspects of your inner journey even though our outer details were quite different. There were several times while reading this chapter that I considered making notes but decided to read it all through first. I'll try to get back and do that.
I find myself strongly identifying with so many aspects of your inner journey even though our outer details were quite different. There were several times while reading this chapter that I considered making notes but decided to read it all through first. I'll try to get back and do that.
In light of your recent experience with some bookstores not being willing to promote your book, I couldn't help but notice the emphasis that you put on the role of personal choice in setting the course for your future, and respectively for your friends. The older people in your life that you remember influencing you commonly conveyed to you that your future hinged on the choices that you would make. I say, "In light of your recent experience" because I see that theme of individual personal responsibility as being a central point standing in opposition to the pervading theme of the "progressive" ideology into which the young people are being strategically immersed today. To turn people's minds to finding their fulfillment through discovering how they are being victimized so that they can free themselves of who or whatever is oppressing them seems to be a core element to today's indoctrination. There seems to be a presumption that the default setting of human life is that everything would be wonderful if it weren't being spoiled by "bad guys". This implied victimhood, rather than offering hope for fulfillment, cultivates inner rage. This serves the purpose of ever more deeply internalizing the hatred and devisions in society. This being the intention of the movers and shakers behind the goal of imploding the Western democracies as central to "The Great Reset", makes voices like yours targets for marginalization, or "canceling".
In light of your recent experience with some bookstores not being willing to promote your book, I couldn't help but notice the emphasis that you put on the role of personal choice in setting the course for your future, and respectively for your friends. The older people in your life that you remember influencing you commonly conveyed to you that your future hinged on the choices that you would make. I say, "In light of your recent experience" because I see that theme of individual personal responsibility as being a central point standing in opposition to the pervading theme of the "progressive" ideology into which the young people are being strategically immersed today. To turn people's minds to finding their fulfillment through discovering how they are being victimized so that they can free themselves of who or whatever is oppressing them seems to be a core element to today's indoctrination. There seems to be a presumption that the default setting of human life is that everything would be wonderful if it weren't being spoiled by "bad guys". This implied victimhood, rather than offering hope for fulfillment, cultivates inner rage. This serves the purpose of ever more deeply internalizing the hatred and devisions in society. This being the intention of the movers and shakers behind the goal of imploding the Western democracies as central to "The Great Reset", makes voices like yours targets for marginalization, or "canceling".
Your life story embodies the exact opposite as it continually holds personal choices together with the consequences thereof illustrating the core role of taking responsibility for ourselves in not only the circumstantial outcomes in our lives but also, and perhaps most importantly, the development of mature character. When people live by that rationale, their own challenges and weaknesses in dealing with the inherent uncertainties of life tend to make them sensitive to the plight of others, building a sense of empathy toward others, even those of very different sub-cultures. This kind of appreciation for the broadly shared journey across the varied contexts of life is exactly what is being assailed by Soros,et.al.
Your life story embodies the exact opposite as it continually holds personal choices together with the consequences thereof illustrating the core role of taking responsibility for ourselves in not only the circumstantial outcomes in our lives but also, and perhaps most importantly, the development of mature character. When people live by that rationale, their own challenges and weaknesses in dealing with the inherent uncertainties of life tend to make them sensitive to the plight of others, building a sense of empathy toward others, even those of very different sub-cultures. This kind of appreciation for the broadly shared journey across the varied contexts of life is exactly what is being assailed by Soros,et.al.
Like (4)
Reply
Share
Kevin Oberg
Kevin Oberg
Jan 20, 2024
Ending on a cliffhanger, eh? Good promotional strategy.
Ending on a cliffhanger, eh? Good promotional strategy.
I made my preorder months ago. Cant wait to read it.
I made my preorder months ago. Cant wait to read it.
Like (3)
Reply
Share
Top
Latest
Discussions

Rob Henderson

Rob Henderson

Rob Henderson

Rob Henderson

Rob Henderson

Rob Henderson

Rob Henderson

Rob Henderson

Rob Henderson

Rob Henderson


undefined subscriptions will be displayed on your profile (edit)
Skip for now
For your security, we need to re-authenticate you.
Click the link we sent to sasha.p.podolsky@gmail.com, orclick here to sign in.