

1
Book meeting
Book a meeting
Subscribed
Share
Share
Give a gift subscription
Give a gift subscription
At first, I thought class was about money.I started off in what most people think of as the American lower class.I wasgiven up for adoption when I was three by my birth mother, who was addicted to drugs; I spent the next five years in seven different foster homes in Los Angeles. My mother was from Seoul. I never met my father and had no information about him until I took a 23andMe test last year, which revealed that he was Hispanic, with ancestry from Mexico and Spain. When I was seven, Iwas adoptedby a working-class family and subsequently settled in Red Bluff, California (pop: 13,147; median household income: $27,029). Red Bluff is consistently ranked as thethirdorfourthmost dangerous city in California, just behind Oakland. Eighteen months later, my adoptive parents got divorced, after which my adoptive father severed ties with me.When I was 15, I got my first job as a dishwasher at a pizza joint, and on breaks, all my conversations with coworkers eventually turned to the topic of money. Or the lack of it. We would fantasize about what we would do if we suddenly struck it rich: vacations, cars, a house by the beach (several coworkers played the lottery). In high school, students would spread rumors that so-and-so was wealthy, because their parents had a second house or a boat. We all thought that how much you made was what defined social class. If you had money, you were richwhich for us was indistinguishable from elite. If you didnt, you were broke.But I had a feeling that money wasnt the whole story. This was because I read a lot. But I also watched a lot of TV.In the foster homes I grew up in, the television was constantly playing. My foster siblings and I fought constantly over which shows to watch. Early on, wed argue over whether to watch Power Rangers or Rugrats. Then later, Family Matters or Full House. Usually, the biggest kid won out. Later, after my adoptive parents got divorced, my mom was working full time. The duplex we lived in was often empty. Id turn the TV on first thing in the morning and again as soon as I got home from school. Certain shows were staples that I watched with rapt attention. But Id have other shows playing in the background whenever my mom wasnt around telling me to turn them off.Its possible I watched more TV from birth to age 17 than most upper-class Americans watch in their entire lives. One of my favorite shows growing up was Fresh Prince, in which a teenager growing up in West Philadelphia named Will Smith gets into a fight. Concerned for his safety, his mom arranges for him to move in with relatives. Will whistles for a cab, and when it comes near, he moves in with his Aunt Vivian and Uncle Phil in ritzy Bel-Air.Will attends Bel-Air Academy along with his cousin, Carleton Banks. Will lacks the manners and decorum of Carleton and his classmates; in a poignant moment in season 3 with Uncle Phil, Will describes the difficulties hed experienced trying keeping pace with the other Bel-Air Academy students. It was like everyone had two [roller skates], and I was trying to keep up with one, he says.
At first, I thought class was about money.

I started off in what most people think of as the American lower class.I wasgiven up for adoption when I was three by my birth mother, who was addicted to drugs; I spent the next five years in seven different foster homes in Los Angeles. My mother was from Seoul. I never met my father and had no information about him until I took a 23andMe test last year, which revealed that he was Hispanic, with ancestry from Mexico and Spain. When I was seven, Iwas adoptedby a working-class family and subsequently settled in Red Bluff, California (pop: 13,147; median household income: $27,029). Red Bluff is consistently ranked as thethirdorfourthmost dangerous city in California, just behind Oakland. Eighteen months later, my adoptive parents got divorced, after which my adoptive father severed ties with me.

When I was 15, I got my first job as a dishwasher at a pizza joint, and on breaks, all my conversations with coworkers eventually turned to the topic of money. Or the lack of it. We would fantasize about what we would do if we suddenly struck it rich: vacations, cars, a house by the beach (several coworkers played the lottery). In high school, students would spread rumors that so-and-so was wealthy, because their parents had a second house or a boat. We all thought that how much you made was what defined social class. If you had money, you were richwhich for us was indistinguishable from elite. If you didnt, you were broke.

But I had a feeling that money wasnt the whole story. This was because I read a lot. But I also watched a lot of TV.

In the foster homes I grew up in, the television was constantly playing. My foster siblings and I fought constantly over which shows to watch. Early on, wed argue over whether to watch Power Rangers or Rugrats. Then later, Family Matters or Full House. Usually, the biggest kid won out. Later, after my adoptive parents got divorced, my mom was working full time. The duplex we lived in was often empty. Id turn the TV on first thing in the morning and again as soon as I got home from school. Certain shows were staples that I watched with rapt attention. But Id have other shows playing in the background whenever my mom wasnt around telling me to turn them off.

Its possible I watched more TV from birth to age 17 than most upper-class Americans watch in their entire lives. One of my favorite shows growing up was Fresh Prince, in which a teenager growing up in West Philadelphia named Will Smith gets into a fight. Concerned for his safety, his mom arranges for him to move in with relatives. Will whistles for a cab, and when it comes near, he moves in with his Aunt Vivian and Uncle Phil in ritzy Bel-Air.

Will attends Bel-Air Academy along with his cousin, Carleton Banks. Will lacks the manners and decorum of Carleton and his classmates; in a poignant moment in season 3 with Uncle Phil, Will describes the difficulties hed experienced trying keeping pace with the other Bel-Air Academy students. It was like everyone had two [roller skates], and I was trying to keep up with one, he says.
Its in the third season that college becomes a major plot point. For Carleton, the question was not whether he would attend college, but whether he would follow in the footsteps of his father and go to Princeton. But he doesnt get in. Will, less concerned about college than Carleton, still outscores him on the PSAT and is later offered admission to Princeton.The same themes came up in The O.C., one of the biggest shows of the mid-00s. In The O.C.  what a friend once called Fresh Prince with white people  a teenager from a rough neighborhood named Ryan Atwood gets into a fight, and then moves in with a rich family, the Cohens. At first, Ryan is seen as a troublemaker; later, hes revealed to be a talented student. The Cohens live on a beachfront property in Newport; Ryan feels out of place among his peers at his private high school. In the third season, college becomes a crucial plot point. Seth wants to attend Brown, but he doesnt get in. He goes on to attend a different college. Ryan, less concerned with academics, had still scored in the 98thpercentile on the SAT, and goes on to attend Berkeley.Both Will Smith (the character) and Ryan Atwood are labeled as troubled in their respective TV shows. Both were abandoned by their fathers and left to be raised by single moms. Essentially, adults neglected their responsibilities to their children, and then other adults gave them this label. I was given this label, too. Which is why its the title for my bookTroubled: A Memoir of Foster Care, Family, and Social Class.Anyway, it sounds absurd now, but this obsession with college genuinely puzzled me at the time. I would later realize that these shows were my first glimpse into a world that wasnt mine, but they wouldnt be the last.Today, I have degrees from Yale and Cambridge and earn a comfortable upper-middle-class living beyond the wildest dreams of my teenage self. To get here has been a long journey through a variety of social milieus: an impoverished slum apartment in Los Angeles with my birth mother, the LA County foster care system, my adoptive blue-collar hometown in Northern California, then the military, then college. What Ive come to realize along the way is the complicated relationship between pop culture  specifically, in my case, television  and social class in America. Watching television, I learned the ingredients for social mobility. But I also discovered the limits of pop culture as a vehicle for learning about class in America.
Its in the third season that college becomes a major plot point. For Carleton, the question was not whether he would attend college, but whether he would follow in the footsteps of his father and go to Princeton. But he doesnt get in. Will, less concerned about college than Carleton, still outscores him on the PSAT and is later offered admission to Princeton.

The same themes came up in The O.C., one of the biggest shows of the mid-00s. In The O.C.  what a friend once called Fresh Prince with white people  a teenager from a rough neighborhood named Ryan Atwood gets into a fight, and then moves in with a rich family, the Cohens. At first, Ryan is seen as a troublemaker; later, hes revealed to be a talented student. The Cohens live on a beachfront property in Newport; Ryan feels out of place among his peers at his private high school. In the third season, college becomes a crucial plot point. Seth wants to attend Brown, but he doesnt get in. He goes on to attend a different college. Ryan, less concerned with academics, had still scored in the 98thpercentile on the SAT, and goes on to attend Berkeley.

Both Will Smith (the character) and Ryan Atwood are labeled as troubled in their respective TV shows. Both were abandoned by their fathers and left to be raised by single moms. Essentially, adults neglected their responsibilities to their children, and then other adults gave them this label. I was given this label, too. Which is why its the title for my book
.

Anyway, it sounds absurd now, but this obsession with college genuinely puzzled me at the time. I would later realize that these shows were my first glimpse into a world that wasnt mine, but they wouldnt be the last.

Today, I have degrees from Yale and Cambridge and earn a comfortable upper-middle-class living beyond the wildest dreams of my teenage self. To get here has been a long journey through a variety of social milieus: an impoverished slum apartment in Los Angeles with my birth mother, the LA County foster care system, my adoptive blue-collar hometown in Northern California, then the military, then college. What Ive come to realize along the way is the complicated relationship between pop culture  specifically, in my case, television  and social class in America. Watching television, I learned the ingredients for social mobility. But I also discovered the limits of pop culture as a vehicle for learning about class in America.
What does it mean to be a member of the elite, and why is the idea of eliteness so thorny to define? Part of the difficulty is that there is no airtight definitionthe word means different things to different people. Surely, it has something to do with social class. But how to understand social class? The personal interactions Id had in childhood led me to believe that class was defined by money. Then, watching television, I observed that the characters were not that interested in money; they were more interested in college  because class markers it turns out, mean different things to different people too.Later, I discovered that my observations roughly aligned with those of the cultural historian, Paul Fussell. In his classicwork,Class: A Guide Through the American Status System, Fussell stresses that the criteria we use to define the tiers of the social hierarchy is in fact indicative of our own social class.For people near the bottom, Fussell says, social class is indeed defined by money  in this regard, I was right in line with my peers when I was growing up. The middle class, though, believes its not just about money; equally important is education. In the absence of hereditary ranks and titles, Fussell writes, Americans have had to depend for their mechanism of snobbery...on their college and university hierarchy.Still, Fussell notes, money and education arent enough to climb all the way up the ladder. That is because the highest tiers of society assign great importance to taste, values, ideas, style, and behavior  what the renowned French sociologistPierre Bourdieureferred to ashabitus. As I explain in my forthcoming book, my updated term is "luxury beliefs."These ephemeral qualitiesare harder to obtain or quantify than a large bank account or a college diploma. This, according to Bourdieu, is why the upper class uses habitus as a filtering mechanism. Its a method to know who was born and raised as a member of the elite and who was not.Even though Bourdieu did most of his work in the 1960s before Netflix and the Golden Age of Televisionhis observations still hold true. Viewing fictional depictions of those in higher social classes, I gained some understanding of this different world. Some of the habitus of the elite eluded me, no matter how much TV I watched.
What does it mean to be a member of the elite, and why is the idea of eliteness so thorny to define? Part of the difficulty is that there is no airtight definitionthe word means different things to different people. Surely, it has something to do with social class. But how to understand social class? The personal interactions Id had in childhood led me to believe that class was defined by money. Then, watching television, I observed that the characters were not that interested in money; they were more interested in college  because class markers it turns out, mean different things to different people too.

Later, I discovered that my observations roughly aligned with those of the cultural historian, Paul Fussell. In his classicwork,
, Fussell stresses that the criteria we use to define the tiers of the social hierarchy is in fact indicative of our own social class.

For people near the bottom, Fussell says, social class is indeed defined by money  in this regard, I was right in line with my peers when I was growing up. The middle class, though, believes its not just about money; equally important is education. In the absence of hereditary ranks and titles, Fussell writes, Americans have had to depend for their mechanism of snobbery...on their college and university hierarchy.

Still, Fussell notes, money and education arent enough to climb all the way up the ladder. That is because the highest tiers of society assign great importance to taste, values, ideas, style, and behavior  what the renowned French sociologistPierre Bourdieureferred to as
. As I explain in my forthcoming book, my updated term is "
."
These ephemeral qualitiesare harder to obtain or quantify than a large bank account or a college diploma. This, according to Bourdieu, is why the upper class uses habitus as a filtering mechanism. Its a method to know who was born and raised as a member of the elite and who was not.

Even though Bourdieu did most of his work in the 1960s before Netflix and the Golden Age of Televisionhis observations still hold true. Viewing fictional depictions of those in higher social classes, I gained some understanding of this different world. Some of the habitus of the elite eluded me, no matter how much TV I watched.
By my senior year of high school, thanks to TV, Id figured out that college was important. (By way of comparison, while the characters from my favorite shows were offered admission to Princeton and Berkeley, the smartest kid in my high school class  the one everyone knew was going to college  went to California State University, Fullerton). But for me, college wasnt important enough  not yet anyway. After graduating high school, I didnt go away to college. My early life had been a mess, and Id been a terrible student. After graduating with a 2.2 GPA in the bottom third of my class,I decidedto enlist in the military.Which has a different social class milieu than many affluent people think. There is a widespread belief that enlisted military members are especially likely to come from the lower rungs of American societypeople like me. But in fact, enlisted members of the military aredisproportionately drawnfrom the middle class. Throughout my enlistment, I learned from actual rather than fictional people about the importance of education. Service members who had college credits or a degree were typically promoted faster, and supervisors often urged subordinates to go to take night classes. The military offered veterans the GI Bill to cover tuition; I finally started making college plans.One year before my enlistment was over, but before I knew where Id be headed next, I attended the Warrior-Scholar Project, an organization that hosts academic boot camps to teach military veterans how to succeed in college. There, I learned a lot about how to be a good college student: How to write a college-level essay, what a thesis is, tips for studying.Equally useful, though, were the insights I gleaned from the unstructured time throughout the program. The tutors at this program were either students or graduates of top universities like Yale, Dartmouth, and Amherst. Some were veterans, and others were typical college students working as tutors for the summer. Between lessons and writing workshops, me and the other students would hang out with the tutors and have informal conversations. And sometimes Id overhear them speak with one another.I became close with one, a recent Yale graduate. One evening, I saw him watching something on his MacBook. He told me it was The West Wing. Id never seen this show, nor did anyone I know watch it. My military friends watchedTwo and a Half Men (I didnt enjoy it), Game of Thrones (unsuccessfully tried twice to get into it), and Family Guy (was one of my favorite shows).But when another tutor overheard him recommend the show to me, she nodded vigorously, saying Ihadto watch it. I took the recommendation seriously  I watched The West Wing. It was, after all, the first show that two Ivy League graduates had ever recommended to me. In my mind, if two Ivy League graduates watched a show, this meant that everyone who attends such schools watches it (If two different veterans told you that youhadwatch a certain show, you might think all veterans were fans of it). Thus, if I did decide to attend college, this was an important cultural touchstone to understand. What if someone made a comment referencing the show and I didnt understand? It was an attempt to learn more about the distinctive culture of a highly influential segment of society.But as I worked my way through the first season, I had a realization:The West Wingis not very good.Granted, part of this may be because of the gap between era it was produced in and when I was watching it, and the fact that it was on network television. I suspect if a similar show were made today for Netflix or HBO, it would be better. Still, I kept watching  because I was intrigued by what it told me about the people whod recommended it.In fact,West Wingcreator Aaron Sorkin has explained in aninterviewwith David Brooks that the pilot episode didnt test well. But, according to Sorkin, it tested extremely well with certain audience segments: Households that earned more than $75,000 a year, households where there was someone with a college degree, and households that subscribed to theNew York Times. I was not a part of any of these groups, which was why the show didnt test well on me. And if you look closely, youll notice he is in fact describing the 3 ingredients of social class: money, education, and habitus.The people onThe West Wingwere constantly engaged in debates about contentious social and political issues. One plotline I found particularly interesting was when President Bartlet watches his deputy communications director, Sam Seaborn, lose a debate against a Republican woman named Ainsley Hayes. To her surprise (and mine), the President offers her a job in his administration, citing her sense of civic duty. In fact, the more I watched, the more the characters reminded me of the Warrior-Scholar Project tutors. Characters like Josh Lyman and C.J. Cregg were educated at elite universities and, despite their flaws, tried to live up to their moral principles. They engaged in fierce debate with political foes, but respected them too. The characters who staffed the Bartlet Administration were highly educated, extremely witty, and idealistic. It made me wonder: was this show so popular among elite college graduates because they saw aspirational versions of themselves in it?Early on, I thought of television as a window into another world. I would watch it to escape the one I was in, and to learn more about others. Later, though, it became more like a mirror. The more I saw, the more I learned what I wanted; the shows I chose to watch, in turn, reflected my desire to build a better life for myself, and I took my cues from them on how to construct it. Either stay like this, I thought, as I gazed at the TV, or try to live like that. This was what happened with The West Wing.At first, I watched to learn why the tutors recommended it to me. I continued to watch because it showed me what I wanted. I watched two full seasons before stopping, but scenes from the series have stayed with me. Josh Lyman boasted about how hed attended Harvard and Yale. C.J. Cregg asked President Bartlet why hed attended Notre Dame when hed gotten into Harvard, Yale and Williams. For me, the show confirmed that education was indeed a necessary ingredient for a better life  and that not all educations were created equal.
By my senior year of high school, thanks to TV, Id figured out that college was important. (By way of comparison, while the characters from my favorite shows were offered admission to Princeton and Berkeley, the smartest kid in my high school class  the one everyone knew was going to college  went to California State University, Fullerton). But for me, college wasnt important enough  not yet anyway. After graduating high school, I didnt go away to college. My early life had been a mess, and Id been a terrible student. After graduating with a 2.2 GPA in the bottom third of my class,
to enlist in the military.

Which has a different social class milieu than many affluent people think. There is a widespread belief that enlisted military members are especially likely to come from the lower rungs of American societypeople like me. But in fact, enlisted members of the military are
from the middle class. Throughout my enlistment, I learned from actual rather than fictional people about the importance of education. Service members who had college credits or a degree were typically promoted faster, and supervisors often urged subordinates to go to take night classes. The military offered veterans the GI Bill to cover tuition; I finally started making college plans.

One year before my enlistment was over, but before I knew where Id be headed next, I attended the Warrior-Scholar Project, an organization that hosts academic boot camps to teach military veterans how to succeed in college. There, I learned a lot about how to be a good college student: How to write a college-level essay, what a thesis is, tips for studying.

Equally useful, though, were the insights I gleaned from the unstructured time throughout the program. The tutors at this program were either students or graduates of top universities like Yale, Dartmouth, and Amherst. Some were veterans, and others were typical college students working as tutors for the summer. Between lessons and writing workshops, me and the other students would hang out with the tutors and have informal conversations. And sometimes Id overhear them speak with one another.

I became close with one, a recent Yale graduate. One evening, I saw him watching something on his MacBook. He told me it was The West Wing. Id never seen this show, nor did anyone I know watch it. My military friends watchedTwo and a Half Men (I didnt enjoy it), Game of Thrones (unsuccessfully tried twice to get into it), and Family Guy (was one of my favorite shows).But when another tutor overheard him recommend the show to me, she nodded vigorously, saying I
to watch it. I took the recommendation seriously  I watched The West Wing. It was, after all, the first show that two Ivy League graduates had ever recommended to me. In my mind, if two Ivy League graduates watched a show, this meant that everyone who attends such schools watches it (If two different veterans told you that you
watch a certain show, you might think all veterans were fans of it). Thus, if I did decide to attend college, this was an important cultural touchstone to understand. What if someone made a comment referencing the show and I didnt understand? It was an attempt to learn more about the distinctive culture of a highly influential segment of society.

But as I worked my way through the first season, I had a realization:The West Wingis not very good.

Granted, part of this may be because of the gap between era it was produced in and when I was watching it, and the fact that it was on network television. I suspect if a similar show were made today for Netflix or HBO, it would be better. Still, I kept watching  because I was intrigued by what it told me about the people whod recommended it.

In fact,West Wingcreator Aaron Sorkin has explained in an
with David Brooks that the pilot episode didnt test well. But, according to Sorkin, it tested extremely well with certain audience segments: Households that earned more than $75,000 a year, households where there was someone with a college degree, and households that subscribed to the
. I was not a part of any of these groups, which was why the show didnt test well on me. And if you look closely, youll notice he is in fact describing the 3 ingredients of social class: money, education, and habitus.

The people onThe West Wingwere constantly engaged in debates about contentious social and political issues. One plotline I found particularly interesting was when President Bartlet watches his deputy communications director, Sam Seaborn, lose a debate against a Republican woman named Ainsley Hayes. To her surprise (and mine), the President offers her a job in his administration, citing her sense of civic duty. In fact, the more I watched, the more the characters reminded me of the Warrior-Scholar Project tutors. Characters like Josh Lyman and C.J. Cregg were educated at elite universities and, despite their flaws, tried to live up to their moral principles. They engaged in fierce debate with political foes, but respected them too. The characters who staffed the Bartlet Administration were highly educated, extremely witty, and idealistic. It made me wonder: was this show so popular among elite college graduates because they saw aspirational versions of themselves in it?
Early on, I thought of television as a window into another world. I would watch it to escape the one I was in, and to learn more about others. Later, though, it became more like a mirror. The more I saw, the more I learned what I wanted; the shows I chose to watch, in turn, reflected my desire to build a better life for myself, and I took my cues from them on how to construct it. Either stay like this, I thought, as I gazed at the TV, or try to live like that. This was what happened with The West Wing.
At first, I watched to learn why the tutors recommended it to me. I continued to watch because it showed me what I wanted. I watched two full seasons before stopping, but scenes from the series have stayed with me. Josh Lyman boasted about how hed attended Harvard and Yale. C.J. Cregg asked President Bartlet why hed attended Notre Dame when hed gotten into Harvard, Yale and Williams. For me, the show confirmed that education was indeed a necessary ingredient for a better life  and that not all educations were created equal.
On my first deployment in 2011, I watched the entire series ofThe Sopranos(thanks, Bittorrent). When youre not on duty, there are only two things to do on deployment: Work out and watch movies/TV. Early in the show, Carmela Soprano issues a thinly veiled threat to their neighbor, Jeannie Cusamano. Her aim was to pressure Jeannie into getting her sister, a Georgetown alumna, to write a letter of recommendation for Carmelas daughter for Georgetown admissions.
On my first deployment in 2011, I watched the entire series ofThe Sopranos
(thanks, Bittorrent). When youre not on duty, there are only two things to do on deployment: Work out and watch movies/TV. Early in the show, Carmela Soprano issues a thinly veiled threat to their neighbor, Jeannie Cusamano. Her aim was to pressure Jeannie into getting her sister, a Georgetown alumna, to write a letter of recommendation for Carmelas daughter for Georgetown admissions.
Tony and Carmela beam when one of their friends compliments them upon learning that their daughter was accepted to Columbia University. Even for this crime family, it was crucial that their daughter get into an elite university. The Soprano parents, especially Carmela, understood that attending such a school will go a long way to establishing Meadow within the American status system.
Tony, the protagonist, wanted desperately to fit in with the affluent doctors and lawyers in his neighborhood. But they treated him as a curiosity, cracking jokes and asking Tony about John Gotti during golfing outings.
Apparently, there is a trope about TV snobs. The trope is that HBOs The Wire is the best show on television. A few years ago, "Family Guy" even had ascenemaking fun of this. That "Family Guy" scene also pokes fun at the snobs who love Breaking Bad (more on this show soon). Both of these shows are good. I loved The Wire.One of the main characters in season one, a narcotics trafficker named DAngelo Barksdale, gives his perspective on Fitzgeralds message inThe Great Gatsby:
Apparently, there is a trope about TV snobs. The trope is that HBOs The Wire is the best show on television. A few years ago, "Family Guy" even had a
making fun of this. That "Family Guy" scene also pokes fun at the snobs who love Breaking Bad (more on this show soon). Both of these shows are good. I loved The Wire.

One of the main characters in season one, a narcotics trafficker named DAngelo Barksdale, gives his perspective on Fitzgeralds message in
:
He's saying that the past is always with us. Where we come from, what we go through, how we go through it  all that shit matters. It's like, you can change up. You can say you somebody new. You can give yourself a whole new story. But what came first is who you really are, and what happened before is what really happened. It doesn't matter that some fool say he different, because the only thing that make you different is what you really do, or what you really go through. Gatsby, he was who he was, and he did what he did, and because he wasn't ready to get real with the story, that shit caught up to him.
He's saying that the past is always with us. Where we come from, what we go through, how we go through it  all that shit matters. It's like, you can change up. You can say you somebody new. You can give yourself a whole new story. But what came first is who you really are, and what happened before is what really happened. It doesn't matter that some fool say he different, because the only thing that make you different is what you really do, or what you really go through. Gatsby, he was who he was, and he did what he did, and because he wasn't ready to get real with the story, that shit caught up to him.
You can try to join a different social class, but you will never be fully comfortable within it.This is a recurring theme for people who were born into one class but find themselves in another. In his 2013 song So Far... the rapper Eminem comments on this:
You can try to join a different social class, but you will never be fully comfortable within it.

This is a recurring theme for people who were born into one class but find themselves in another. In his 2013 song So Far... the rapper Eminem comments on this:
I think this poor white trash from the trailer/Jed Clampett, Fred Sanford, and welfare/Mentality helps to keep me grounded/That's why I never take full advantage of wealth/I managed to dwell within these parameters/Still crammin' the shelves full of Hamburger Helper/I can't even help it, this is the hand I was dealt.
I think this poor white trash from the trailer/Jed Clampett, Fred Sanford, and welfare/Mentality helps to keep me grounded/That's why I never take full advantage of wealth/I managed to dwell within these parameters/Still crammin' the shelves full of Hamburger Helper/I can't even help it, this is the hand I was dealt.
Another of my favorite scenes fromThe Wireis when DAngelo takes his girlfriend to a nice restaurant in Baltimore. You can watch it here:
Another of my favorite scenes from
is when DAngelo takes his girlfriend to a nice restaurant in Baltimore. You can watch it here:
Right away, DAngelo is uncomfortable when the maitre d' asks if they have reservations.
Hes not at ease.After dinner, he asks his girlfriend if the other patrons know that hes different from them. She replies that there are other black people in the restaurant. But DAngelo wasnt talking about race, he was talking aboutclass.He tries to explain. Come on, you know, its like we get all dressed up, right? Fancy place like this. After we finished, we going to go down to the harbor, walk around a little bit, you know? Acting like we belong here.DAngelo feels like he and Donnette stand out, that others can sense this. Even though the other patrons are absorbed in their own worlds.Donette replies, So? Your money good, right? And she is right. When DAngelo talks about belonging, he seems to sense that there is a club.For Donette, the only requirement for entry into the club is money. She echoes Gatsbys vision of the American Dream when she says Boy, dont nobody give a damn about you or your story. You got money, you get to be whatever you say you are. Thats the way it is.But DAngelo cant shake the feeling that this isnt true.
Hes not at ease.

After dinner, he asks his girlfriend if the other patrons know that hes different from them. She replies that there are other black people in the restaurant. But DAngelo wasnt talking about race, he was talking about
.

He tries to explain. Come on, you know, its like we get all dressed up, right? Fancy place like this. After we finished, we going to go down to the harbor, walk around a little bit, you know? Acting like we belong here.

DAngelo feels like he and Donnette stand out, that others can sense this. Even though the other patrons are absorbed in their own worlds.

Donette replies, So? Your money good, right? And she is right. When DAngelo talks about belonging, he seems to sense that there is a club.

For Donette, the only requirement for entry into the club is money. She echoes Gatsbys vision of the American Dream when she says Boy, dont nobody give a damn about you or your story. You got money, you get to be whatever you say you are. Thats the way it is.

But DAngelo cant shake the feeling that this isnt true.
It didnt dawn on me that I was learning about social class through pop culture until I started watchingMad Men. In this series, the rags-to-riches protagonist Don Draper watched movies and television to help blend into the world of New Yorks upper class. At one point, Peggy Olson, a lead character in the show, expresses surprise that Don had not seen a new advertisement: But you see everything, she observed. Now, I dont seeeverythingtheres far more content today than there was in 1965but I see a lot.It was an accident that I even discovered Mad Men. The show was notorious for having a small viewership even as it garnered outsized attention and cultural cachet from critics. At its peak,Mad Menhad slightly more than 3 million viewers.I started watching because it came on right after an episode ofBreaking Bad a far more popular show, with a peak audience of over 10 million. Few of my friends in the military watchedMad Men, but many of them watchedBreaking Bad. When the finale was scheduled to air in 2013, my military buddies and I would break into arguments about what would become of Walt and Jesse.Early in the first season ofBreaking Bad, Walters 2004 Pontiac Aztek is shown with a faded factory paint job and is missing the hubcap on the wheel on the drivers rear corner. My military friend was with me when we saw Walters car on screen. He said, Damn, this show is real. He explained that oftentimes, supposedly middle class or working class people on TV are depicted as better off than their real-life counterparts. Roseanne Conners house is one example of this. I also noticed the fact that Roseanne and Dan were married and never divorced was a sharp contrast with the working class families Id grown up around. Anyway, Id watchBreaking Badwith my friends.By contrast, I watchedMad Menmostly in solitude. The final season of the seriesaired in 2015. By then, Id been accepted to Yale, and this was the summer right before my first semester. Ever sinceThe West Wing, Id started paying closer attention to the shows I watched, and suddenly social class cues were everywhere  especially inMad Men, where part of the plot revolves around Dons attempts to conceal his true origins. In one episode, Roger Sterling, Dons boss, invites himself over to the Drapers house for dinner. After a few drinks, Roger says to Don, From the way you drop your G's every once in a while, I always thought you were raised on a farm. Don, visibly uncomfortable, changes the subject. Then, in the final season, Don travels to Oklahoma. A young motel employee named Andy tries to figure out how Don got rich.
It didnt dawn on me that I was learning about social class through pop culture until I started watchingMad Men. In this series, the rags-to-riches protagonist Don Draper watched movies and television to help blend into the world of New Yorks upper class. At one point, Peggy Olson, a lead character in the show, expresses surprise that Don had not seen a new advertisement: But you see everything, she observed. Now, I dont see
theres far more content today than there was in 1965but I see a lot.

It was an accident that I even discovered Mad Men. The show was notorious for having a small viewership even as it garnered outsized attention and cultural cachet from critics. At its peak,Mad Menhad slightly more than 3 million viewers.

I started watching because it came on right after an episode ofBreaking Bad a far more popular show, with a peak audience of over 10 million. Few of my friends in the military watchedMad Men, but many of them watchedBreaking Bad. When the finale was scheduled to air in 2013, my military buddies and I would break into arguments about what would become of Walt and Jesse.

Early in the first season ofBreaking Bad, Walters 2004 Pontiac Aztek is shown with a faded factory paint job and is missing the hubcap on the wheel on the drivers rear corner. My military friend was with me when we saw Walters car on screen. He said, Damn, this show is real. He explained that oftentimes, supposedly middle class or working class people on TV are depicted as better off than their real-life counterparts. Roseanne Conners house is one example of this. I also noticed the fact that Roseanne and Dan were married and never divorced was a sharp contrast with the working class families Id grown up around. Anyway, Id watchBreaking Badwith my friends.

By contrast, I watchedMad Menmostly in solitude. The final season of the seriesaired in 2015. By then, Id been accepted to Yale, and this was the summer right before my first semester. Ever sinceThe West Wing, Id started paying closer attention to the shows I watched, and suddenly social class cues were everywhere  especially inMad Men, where part of the plot revolves around Dons attempts to conceal his true origins. In one episode, Roger Sterling, Dons boss, invites himself over to the Drapers house for dinner. After a few drinks, Roger says to Don, From the way you drop your G's every once in a while, I always thought you were raised on a farm. Don, visibly uncomfortable, changes the subject. Then, in the final season, Don travels to Oklahoma. A young motel employee named Andy tries to figure out how Don got rich.
You make commercials on TV? Andy asks.Lots of them, Don replies.So many you dont have to work no more?Anymore, Don corrects him. (Don is saying he got rich through creating ads. Implicitly, though, Don is communicating that he got rich by changing the way he speaks.)I remember pausing during an episode in the third season, when Dons secrets are coming out, and hes afraid of losing everything. I know you were ashamed of being poor, his wife, Betty. I see how you are with money, I know you don't understand it. This was mystifying. Don was the creative director of a top advertising agency and widely respected for his talent. He was rich. At another point in the series, Betty admonishes Don for giving a hotel bellhop too large a tip. "Two dollars?" She asks,Thats what he makes in a week.
You make commercials on TV? Andy asks.
Lots of them, Don replies.
So many you dont have to work no more?

, Don corrects him. (Don is saying he got rich through creating ads. Implicitly, though, Don is communicating that he got rich by changing the way he speaks.)

I remember pausing during an episode in the third season, when Dons secrets are coming out, and hes afraid of losing everything. I know you were ashamed of being poor, his wife, Betty. I see how you are with money, I know you don't understand it. This was mystifying. Don was the creative director of a top advertising agency and widely respected for his talent. He was rich. At another point in the series, Betty admonishes Don for giving a hotel bellhop too large a tip. "Two dollars?" She asks,Thats what he makes in a week.
Later, in season six, Don is pitching an ad for Hershey. The pitch is about how the chocolate wrapper looked like what was inside. The show uses this idea as a clever piece of symbolism. The Don people see on the outside is not who Don really is on the inside. During the pitch with the clients, Don break down and reveals his true impoverished origins.
By this point in my relationship with pop culture, I had unearthed a hitherto unknown media landscape centered on the interpretation of television. It was strange and fascinating to me that so much time was spent analyzing something Id consumed so passively. As I clicked through various prestige media outlets Id only recently learned aboutThe New Yorker,The Atlantic,Vanity FairI came upon episode recaps and analyses. I distinctly recall one person writing that Don misunderstands money because he believes it solves everything, and only someone who grew up without money would have this mindset. This is an error that one cant unlearn simply through watching movies.At first, I read critics to understand shows I was watching. Later, I read critics to get recommendations. I had questions about what members of the upper class watched, and why they watched it.In 2014, I read a column in theThe New Yorkerin which Emily Nussbaum observed that the characters in the Showtime seriesThe Affairare the kind of people who would watchThe Affair. Upon reading this, I knew I had to watch.The show was unlike anything Id seen before. Other shows likeFresh Prince,The O.C.,andMad Menprovided viewers with audience surrogates who were strangers in a new elite world. Will Smith and Don Draper provided an outsiders perspective for viewers. By contrast, none of the characters onThe Affairprovided the perspective of an outsider to an elite world. And similar toMad Men,The Affairwas beloved by critics. Also likeMad Men,it was first set on the East Coast, and later expanded to include Los Angeles in later seasons (CurbYour Enthusiasmis one of the rare shows that does the opposite  Larry moves from Los Angeles to the East Coast). ButThe Affairwas even more nicheat its peak, the audience was just shy of a million viewers. Two of the main characters attended Williams College  a buried social signal: if this show had been intended for a mainstream audience, they would have been alumni of Princeton or Harvard.That the show was meant for a niche viewership of people very different from me was what I found so appealing aboutThe Affair. I wasnt supposed to be watching it, but I was. I cant say I liked the characters very much (though they are mostly redeemed in the final season); still, I was surprised to find myself sympathizing with characters who had every advantage, yet had tragic and recognizably human experiences and flaws.The Affairwas the peak of my experience using television to learn about social class; it is also the most elite of all the television shows I watched. It did not have a rags-to-riches character with which an audience could identify. In other words,The Affairtook for granted that its characters were well-off, and producers felt no need to help the audience understand this world because they assumed viewers were a part of it.
By this point in my relationship with pop culture, I had unearthed a hitherto unknown media landscape centered on the interpretation of television. It was strange and fascinating to me that so much time was spent analyzing something Id consumed so passively. As I clicked through various prestige media outlets Id only recently learned about
,
,
I came upon episode recaps and analyses. I distinctly recall one person writing that Don misunderstands money because he believes it solves everything, and only someone who grew up without money would have this mindset. This is an error that one cant unlearn simply through watching movies.

At first, I read critics to understand shows I was watching. Later, I read critics to get recommendations. I had questions about what members of the upper class watched, and why they watched it.

In 2014, I read a column in the
in which Emily Nussbaum observed that the characters in the Showtime seriesThe Affairare the kind of people who would watchThe Affair. Upon reading this, I knew I had to watch.

The show was unlike anything Id seen before. Other shows like
Fresh Prince,The O.C.,
andMad Menprovided viewers with audience surrogates who were strangers in a new elite world. Will Smith and Don Draper provided an outsiders perspective for viewers. By contrast, none of the characters onThe Affair
provided the perspective of an outsider to an elite world. And similar toMad Men,The Affairwas beloved by critics. Also likeMad Men,it was first set on the East Coast, and later expanded to include Los Angeles in later seasons (CurbYour Enthusiasm
is one of the rare shows that does the opposite  Larry moves from Los Angeles to the East Coast). ButThe Affairwas even more nicheat its peak, the audience was just shy of a million viewers. Two of the main characters attended Williams College  a buried social signal: if this show had been intended for a mainstream audience, they would have been alumni of Princeton or Harvard.

That the show was meant for a niche viewership of people very different from me was what I found so appealing aboutThe Affair. I wasnt supposed to be watching it, but I was. I cant say I liked the characters very much (though they are mostly redeemed in the final season); still, I was surprised to find myself sympathizing with characters who had every advantage, yet had tragic and recognizably human experiences and flaws.The Affairwas the peak of my experience using television to learn about social class; it is also the most elite of all the television shows I watched. It did not have a rags-to-riches character with which an audience could identify. In other words,The Affairtook for granted that its characters were well-off, and producers felt no need to help the audience understand this world because they assumed viewers were a part of it.
As my first day as a student at Yale approached, I figured that by now I had acclimated enough via television and other forms of media to where I wouldnt stand out too much.
I gave myself away almost instantly. Though I didnt speak in double-negatives or drop my Gs like Don Draper, I soon discovered how much I had to learn to fit in, despite all that elite television. People on campus were fluent in a language I still could not speak. I remember being bewildered the first time I heard another student describe a joke Id made as gendered, for instance  Id never heard that word before.But going to Yale also meant I no longer needed television to learn how to fit in among elites  I was among them. I muddled through, learning their language and adopting some of their beliefs. My practice of using pop culture to learn about class receded, and I became less deliberate about what shows I watched. Today, I can speak a language today that would have been Greek to me seven years ago (though I still make errors).I cant help but pick up on social class cues on television now. I was recently re-watchingThe Office and realized that it is tailored for the middle class. The temp, Ryan Howard, is given special treatment by the boss, Michael Scott, because he is a college graduate and attended night classes for his MBA (Michael himself did not go to college). Later in the series, Ryan is promoted above Michael. When Ryan is interviewed by David Wallace for the position, Wallace says to him Itll be great to have another MBA around here.Throughout the show, there are episodes centered on money and education (Andy Bernard never forgets to mention what college he attended). But there is little attention paid to what Paul Fussell called the indispensable criteria of upper-class statustaste, habits, vocabulary.Recently, I was at an academic program in Washington, D.C. There, for the first time in my life, a stranger mistook me for having come from a wealthy background. Im not rich, I said. I just watch a lot of TV. I said it as a joke, but it wasnt. My binging to belong approach wasnt foolproof, but it helped. TV helped me to understand people who were worlds away from how I grew up. It gave me an understanding of the ingredients of social mobility. What I cant quite disentangle is whether it taught me how to get what I had always wanted or taught me what to want.
I gave myself away almost instantly. Though I didnt speak in double-negatives or drop my Gs like Don Draper, I soon discovered how much I had to learn to fit in, despite all that elite television. People on campus were fluent in a language I still could not speak. I remember being bewildered the first time I heard another student describe a joke Id made as gendered, for instance  Id never heard that word before.

But going to Yale also meant I no longer needed television to learn how to fit in among elites  I was among them. I muddled through, learning their language and adopting some of their beliefs. My practice of using pop culture to learn about class receded, and I became less deliberate about what shows I watched. Today, I can speak a language today that would have been Greek to me seven years ago (though I still make errors).

I cant help but pick up on social class cues on television now. I was recently re-watchingThe Office and realized that it is tailored for the middle class. The temp, Ryan Howard, is given special treatment by the boss, Michael Scott, because he is a college graduate and attended night classes for his MBA (Michael himself did not go to college). Later in the series, Ryan is promoted above Michael. When Ryan is interviewed by David Wallace for the position, Wallace says to him Itll be great to have another MBA around here.

Throughout the show, there are episodes centered on money and education (Andy Bernard never forgets to mention what college he attended). But there is little attention paid to what Paul Fussell called the indispensable criteria of upper-class statustaste, habits, vocabulary.

Recently, I was at an academic program in Washington, D.C. There, for the first time in my life, a stranger mistook me for having come from a wealthy background. Im not rich, I said. I just watch a lot of TV. I said it as a joke, but it wasnt. My binging to belong approach wasnt foolproof, but it helped. TV helped me to understand people who were worlds away from how I grew up. It gave me an understanding of the ingredients of social mobility. What I cant quite disentangle is whether it taught me how to get what I had always wanted or taught me what to want.
You can read much more about social class, television shows, and the disorienting experiences of upward mobility in my forthcoming book. Its out next week (Feb 20), but as an author, pre-orders can make or break a book. Preorders are how the booksellers, reviewers, and publishers judge interest in a title. If youre sure you want to get it, please dont wait! Thank you.
Amazon (US)
Barnes & Noble
Bookshop
Amazon (UK)
Audible(I narrated the audiobook myself)
(I narrated the audiobook myself)
Other book vendors
A very kind shoutout from Morgan Housel, author of
and
.
This post (a reader-favorite) was originally published in 2022.
Comments
Restacks
MetalMoomin
MetalMoomin
MetalMoomin
MetalMoomin
MetalMoomin
Jan 30, 2023
I can completely relate to this. My family came to America from Soviet Kiev, when I was 10. I was a latch key kid, my father traveled as much as possible to get away from my mother; my mother resented me for tying her to a man. She also didnt want to emigrate and saw the whole thing as my fault. Television was my way into America. It was a primer of both - how to be an American and what a family is supposed to be. I aped as much of what I saw, as I could. I understood very little, could relate to almost none of it - yet I intuitively knew, if there was a way out, it was through that screen.
I can completely relate to this. My family came to America from Soviet Kiev, when I was 10. I was a latch key kid, my father traveled as much as possible to get away from my mother; my mother resented me for tying her to a man. She also didnt want to emigrate and saw the whole thing as my fault. Television was my way into America. It was a primer of both - how to be an American and what a family is supposed to be. I aped as much of what I saw, as I could. I understood very little, could relate to almost none of it - yet I intuitively knew, if there was a way out, it was through that screen.
Like (23)
Reply
Share
El Monstro
El Monstro
El Monstro
El Monstro
El Monstro
Feb 16, 2024
Edited
Okay this article got me off the fence and I subscribed. I bought your book last night too.
Okay this article got me off the fence and I subscribed. I bought your book last night too.
We have remarkably similar upbringings. I also grew up poor, was part of a broken family, lived in rural America and ended up in Red Bluff High School, where I graduated. I lived in Proberta, a little wide spot in the road near highway 99.
We have remarkably similar upbringings. I also grew up poor, was part of a broken family, lived in rural America and ended up in Red Bluff High School, where I graduated. I lived in Proberta, a little wide spot in the road near highway 99.
I have a brother, a sister, six step-siblings, and a half brother and sister from my father's third marriage to a woman my age. He was middle aged at the time. There are many stories of addiction, abuse, mental illness and runs with the law in those stories.
I have a brother, a sister, six step-siblings, and a half brother and sister from my father's third marriage to a woman my age. He was middle aged at the time. There are many stories of addiction, abuse, mental illness and runs with the law in those stories.
Unlike you, I was a good student and was constantly reading science fiction instead of watching television. I am also a generation older than you, so TV wasn't as good. While my siblings were watching Brady Bunch, I was reading Asimov's Foundation Series.
Unlike you, I was a good student and was constantly reading science fiction instead of watching television. I am also a generation older than you, so TV wasn't as good. While my siblings were watching Brady Bunch, I was reading Asimov's Foundation Series.
In my graduating class in the early 80s, we had one person who got into Stanford, one to Berkeley, one to Caltech (me!), one to Occidental and one to USC. It's sad to see how far Red Bluff High has fallen. Our teachers did all say that our class was "weird" and by weird I think they meant that we had a clique where studying and being smart and playing D&D and doing theatre was considered a good thing. All my step-brothers smoked and chewed tobacco and hung out by the bleachers. None of them graduated high school and all are ex-cons now. All my sisters had kids by the time they were 21.
In my graduating class in the early 80s, we had one person who got into Stanford, one to Berkeley, one to Caltech (me!), one to Occidental and one to USC. It's sad to see how far Red Bluff High has fallen. Our teachers did all say that our class was "weird" and by weird I think they meant that we had a clique where studying and being smart and playing D&D and doing theatre was considered a good thing. All my step-brothers smoked and chewed tobacco and hung out by the bleachers. None of them graduated high school and all are ex-cons now. All my sisters had kids by the time they were 21.
After failing out of Caltech - partially due to being in a totally different universe class wise - I ended up homeless and then in the military. In the military, I finally learned how to "act like a grown up" which is something my parents never taught me. Since I was one of few of my family of 10 to not get into any trouble with the law or at school, I basically got ignored by my parents. I would stay home from school about one day a week and my mom would write me a note. High school was too easy, so I always did my homework at the last minute. I always worked summers (unique amongst my siblings) but never saved money. My parents were from rural and poor backgrounds themselves. At least my mother encourage my reading.
After failing out of Caltech - partially due to being in a totally different universe class wise - I ended up homeless and then in the military. In the military, I finally learned how to "act like a grown up" which is something my parents never taught me. Since I was one of few of my family of 10 to not get into any trouble with the law or at school, I basically got ignored by my parents. I would stay home from school about one day a week and my mom would write me a note. High school was too easy, so I always did my homework at the last minute. I always worked summers (unique amongst my siblings) but never saved money. My parents were from rural and poor backgrounds themselves. At least my mother encourage my reading.
In the military I had to learn how to shower, put on clean clothes, brush my teach, and get up and go to work every day. I had to learn how to save money and not borrow from payday lenders, not bounce checks, and put aside enough for my college fund (we did not have the GI Bill). I jumped up a social class from being dirt poor and acting it to being a responsible working class person in The Army. I wouldn't really say that the military was full of middle class kids, more working class, but perhaps that distinction doesn't really matter. It also might depend on which branch of service.
In the military I had to learn how to shower, put on clean clothes, brush my teach, and get up and go to work every day. I had to learn how to save money and not borrow from payday lenders, not bounce checks, and put aside enough for my college fund (we did not have the GI Bill). I jumped up a social class from being dirt poor and acting it to being a responsible working class person in The Army. I wouldn't really say that the military was full of middle class kids, more working class, but perhaps that distinction doesn't really matter. It also might depend on which branch of service.
I always wanted to learn, that part wasn't hard. I was a good medic. I still kept reading sci-fi. I learned to care about sports, because I needed to have something to be able to talk to the troops about. They did not care about science or science fiction, but everyone cared about the pennant race. Part of being a good medic is bonding with your platoon. I had to ditch my androgynous mannerisms though I never really passed as straight very well.
I always wanted to learn, that part wasn't hard. I was a good medic. I still kept reading sci-fi. I learned to care about sports, because I needed to have something to be able to talk to the troops about. They did not care about science or science fiction, but everyone cared about the pennant race. Part of being a good medic is bonding with your platoon. I had to ditch my androgynous mannerisms though I never really passed as straight very well.
When I left the military, my Caltech advisor said that I had gone in a boy and come out a man. This is true. I also went in poor and came out middle class.
When I left the military, my Caltech advisor said that I had gone in a boy and come out a man. This is true. I also went in poor and came out middle class.
After that I finished up my transfer credits at community college and finished up at Berkeley.  I ended up in a career in tech where I made more money that I could have ever imagined growing up.
After that I finished up my transfer credits at community college and finished up at Berkeley.  I ended up in a career in tech where I made more money that I could have ever imagined growing up.
I still have some class anxiety, though unlike you, I don't hide it but wear my upbringing on my sleeve. I am also a leftist, which you are not. I hope my kids go to Berkeley as I and my wife did, and there is a good chance my oldest will, though I not-so-secretly hope that she goes to Vassar or Wellesley instead. What's the point of making all the money if you can't raise your children's social standing! They are already a mile apart from where I was when I was young though. Upper middle class in every way and with many of the luxury beliefs you talk about. They are in a performing arts program at a public school in San Francisco, so you can imagine.
I still have some class anxiety, though unlike you, I don't hide it but wear my upbringing on my sleeve. I am also a leftist, which you are not. I hope my kids go to Berkeley as I and my wife did, and there is a good chance my oldest will, though I not-so-secretly hope that she goes to Vassar or Wellesley instead. What's the point of making all the money if you can't raise your children's social standing! They are already a mile apart from where I was when I was young though. Upper middle class in every way and with many of the luxury beliefs you talk about. They are in a performing arts program at a public school in San Francisco, so you can imagine.
At some point you should consider writing about trying to date as an upwardly mobile person. It's been an interesting experience for me.
At some point you should consider writing about trying to date as an upwardly mobile person. It's been an interesting experience for me.
Unfortunately, my story is so unique that this narrative doxxes me. If you read this and know who I am, please do not do so. I want to feel like I can say what I like on substack. Too many of my ideas might get me into trouble in my career other places in my life.
Unfortunately, my story is so unique that this narrative doxxes me. If you read this and know who I am, please do not do so. I want to feel like I can say what I like on substack. Too many of my ideas might get me into trouble in my career other places in my life.
Like (10)
Reply
Share
Top
Latest
Discussions

Rob Henderson

Rob Henderson

Rob Henderson

Rob Henderson

Rob Henderson

Rob Henderson

Rob Henderson

Rob Henderson

Rob Henderson

Rob Henderson


undefined subscriptions will be displayed on your profile (edit)
Skip for now
For your security, we need to re-authenticate you.
Click the link we sent to sasha.p.podolsky@gmail.com, orclick here to sign in.
Info
Shopping







This video is private

0:00/0:00

0:00
/
0:00



Info
Shopping








0:00/2:09

0:00
/
2:09



Info
Shopping








0:00/2:11

0:00
/
2:11



Info
Shopping








0:00/3:44

0:00
/
3:44


