

1
Book meeting
Book a meeting
Subscribed
Share
Share
Give a gift subscription
Give a gift subscription
Were now going to speak about status games.
These are arenas of competition in which people jockey to attain social esteem.
Before we continue, Ill just pause here to say the term game isnt meant to trivialize these patterns of interactions. The dynamics of status games can have high stakes for our reputations and our social lives. By referring to them as games, I mean that they have implicit rules, predictable rituals, relatively agreed upon standards, hold the possibility of desirable payoffs and unwanted penalties, and so on.1
Before we continue, Ill just pause here to say the term game isnt meant to trivialize these patterns of interactions. The dynamics of status games can have high stakes for our reputations and our social lives. By referring to them as games, I mean that they have implicit rules, predictable rituals, relatively agreed upon standards, hold the possibility of desirable payoffs and unwanted penalties, and so on.
1
Maybe I should also note that the concept of game theory is unrelated to what were speaking about here today. But game theory, too, is a framework in which the term game is far from trivial.
Some of this discussion will be drawn from my friend Will Storrs excellent bookThe Status Game: On Social Position and How We Use it.
Some of this discussion will be drawn from my friend Will Storrs excellent book
.
In that book, Storr describes three types of games.
First, there are dominance games. Weve discussed dominance already; these type of games are pervasive among animals but for humans are often unstable and miserable for those involved.
Then there are virtue games, in which people compete to exhibit their moral character. These games can be functional and beneficial to a certain point, but can spiral out of control and give rise to mass suffering.
Finally, there are success games, in which people compete to accomplish tasks that confer prestige in economic or professional realms. Broadly speaking, success games are the most sustainable among the three games and can survive iterated interactions over the long term.
Lets delve a bit more into dominance games. These involve overt aggression and hostility.
Humans, during our evolutionary history, have managed to drastically reduce how frequently we play these games.
Comparing the level of within-group physical aggression among chimpanzees with human hunter-gatherer communities, chimps are 150 to 550 times more likely than humans to inflict violence against their peers.
Humans, compared with other great apes, are relatively peaceful because our ancestors neglected or killeddisagreeable childrenand united againstadult bulliesand alpha male types by either banishing them or executing them. This gradually shaped humans into becoming more cooperative and peaceful. In most, though not all, societies and organizations today, whether in economically advanced nations or small-scale hunter-gatherer groups, social status largely relies not so much on physical coercion but rather on the opinions of other people.
Humans, compared with other great apes, are relatively peaceful because our ancestors neglected or killed
and united against
and alpha male types by either banishing them or executing them. This gradually shaped humans into becoming more cooperative and peaceful. In most, though not all, societies and organizations today, whether in economically advanced nations or small-scale hunter-gatherer groups, social status largely relies not so much on physical coercion but rather on the opinions of other people.
To be sure, dominance games havent been completely eliminated. You can see them in authoritarian political regimes, street gangs, mafias, and militaries. These games rely on the overt or implicit threat of force.
FromThe Status Game:
From
:
The human expectation that social status can be seized through brute force and intimidation, that the strongest and the biggest and boldest will lord it over the rank and file, is very old, awesomely intuitive and deeply ingrained. Its younger rivalprestigewas never able to dislodge dominance from the human mind.
The human expectation that social status can be seized through brute force and intimidation, that the strongest and the biggest and boldest will lord it over the rank and file, is very old, awesomely intuitive and deeply ingrained. Its younger rivalprestigewas never able to dislodge dominance from the human mind.
Humans are generallyextremely sensitiveto dominance and have interesting and conflicted feelings about it. We dont like brute force, coercion, or intimidation. But we are also drawn to it and have a fascination with it, which you can see with fictional stories. We both fear dominance and are enamored by it. It speaks to something in our animal nature.
Humans are generally
to dominance and have interesting and conflicted feelings about it. We dont like brute force, coercion, or intimidation. But we are also drawn to it and have a fascination with it, which you can see with fictional stories. We both fear dominance and are enamored by it. It speaks to something in our animal nature.
With regard to the kinds of dominance games that still existmilitaries, mafias, and street gangs, and so onmost of these games are played by young males. Young male soldiers, gang members, and so on.
Interestingly, most violent crime, and especially homicide, are caused by altercations over seemingly trivial disputes. Name calling, insults, and so on, which often have little in the way of material stakes. What this suggests, then, is that these aredisputes about status.
Interestingly, most violent crime, and especially homicide, are caused by altercations over seemingly trivial disputes. Name calling, insults, and so on, which often have little in the way of material stakes. What this suggests, then, is that these are
.
Men are more likely to get involved in overt aggression and display hostile and violent behavior. But it not just men that play dominance games.Womens dominance gamesare more indirect and covert in nature, involving reputation damage or relational destruction. Often the cloak and dagger strategies of women are bewildering to men, who are frequently oblivious to the subtle dynamics involved.
Men are more likely to get involved in overt aggression and display hostile and violent behavior. But it not just men that play dominance games.
are more indirect and covert in nature, involving reputation damage or relational destruction. Often the cloak and dagger strategies of women are bewildering to men, who are frequently oblivious to the subtle dynamics involved.
Lets now move on to virtue games. These games are about exhibiting high moral charactercompassion, empathy, care, and so on. I mentioned before in an earlier lecture that moral character is the thing that people pay most attention to when they form a first impression of a person.
Researchindicatesthat when people form impressions of others, they assign the highest importance to moral character. Morality eclipses warmth (e.g., sociability, enthusiasm, agreeableness) and ability (e.g., intelligence, athleticism, creativeness) in social evaluations. Which isnt entirely surprising. Before we want to know anything else about an unfamiliar person, the first thing we want to know is, Will this person harm me?
Research
that when people form impressions of others, they assign the highest importance to moral character. Morality eclipses warmth (e.g., sociability, enthusiasm, agreeableness) and ability (e.g., intelligence, athleticism, creativeness) in social evaluations. Which isnt entirely surprising. Before we want to know anything else about an unfamiliar person, the first thing we want to know is, Will this person harm me?
Virtue games can take the form of competitive altruism, where people will go out of their way to be generous to accrue a reputation as a good person. You can see this in philanthropy. Today, virtue games are played out in the arenas of religious organizations, NGOs, nonprofits, in social activism, and in universities and media as well. Interestingly, organizations whose ostensible purpose is to make money are now dipping their toes into the virtue game, as we see when Goldman Sachs makes political statements or when global corporations decide to support fashionable causes under the banner of moral righteousness. Back in 2019 I had a conversation with a politically right-of-center guy who worked in the book publishing industry. I asked him how challenging it was to work with people who hold very different views than him. He said he never had any issues, because ultimately people in that industry still want to sell books and make money; they care most about the bottom line. Things seem to have changed since then. Book publishers used to play success games (which well speak about more in a moment), but they seem increasingly interested in virtue gamesgatekeeping those with whom they deem to be on the wrong side of moral or political issues.
This brings us to the concept of moral grandstanding, a concept which has been discussed invariouspapersand in a book by Justin Tosi and Brandon Warmke. Their definition of grandstanding is The use of public moral discourse for self-promotion and status attainment.
This brings us to the concept of moral grandstanding, a concept which has been discussed in

and in a book by Justin Tosi and Brandon Warmke. Their definition of grandstanding is The use of public moral discourse for self-promotion and status attainment.
A couple of sample items that measure grandstanding:
When I share my moral/political beliefs, I do so to show people who disagree with me that I am better than them.
When I share my moral political beliefs, I do so in the hope that people different than me will feel ashamed of their beliefs.
The extent to which people agree with these statements indicate how inclined they are to moral grandstanding. Grandstanding has a strong statistical correlation with both status seeking and narcissism.
A friend of mine who leads group therapy sessions with recovering addicts told me a story. One of his older patients had recently gotten sober and, during a group session, used the word tranny. A younger patient then began scoffing and crossing his arms and huffing. He could have told the older patient that the word was impolite, or after the group session pulled him aside and explained that while the older man has spent the past decade in a drug-addled funk, that that particular label doesnt land the same way and is unwelcome in polite society. Instead, this young person engaged in a conspicuous behavioral exhibition to inform the rest of the group that he was a good person.
The goal of grandstanding is to establish your moral superiority over another person and shame them into accepting a lower position relative to you.
For what its worth, political party affiliation does not predict likelihood of grandstanding. People on the political right and left are equally prone to grandstanding. However, extremists on both ends of the political spectrum are by far the most likely to use morality as an instrument to shame others or to elevate themselves. Grandstanding is associated with both Right Wing and Left Wing Authoritarianism, each of which are associated with a desire to force others to adhere to a certain set of ideological precepts.
Lets move on tovictim signaling. There was astudypublished in 2020 about victim signaling, defined as Public and intentional expression of ones disadvantages, suffering, oppression, or personal limitations.
Lets move on to
. There was a
published in 2020 about victim signaling, defined as Public and intentional expression of ones disadvantages, suffering, oppression, or personal limitations.
Sample items that measure victim signaling include:
Pointed out how I am not able to pursue my goals and dreams because of external factors.
Expressed how people like me are underrepresented in the media and leadership.
Participants rated the extent to which they engaged in these behaviors.
Victim signaling is strongly correlated with theDark Triad personality traitsof narcissism, psychopathy, and Machiavellianism. The strongest link is with psychopathy (r = .58).
Victim signaling is strongly correlated with the
of narcissism, psychopathy, and Machiavellianism. The strongest link is with psychopathy (r = .58).
These researchers also found that people who scored highly on victim signaling were also more likely to cheat in economic games. Basically, researchers rigged a game so that participants could easily cheat to win more money. They found that participants who scored highly on victim signaling were more likely to cheat to obtain ill-gotten gains for themselves.
To be clear, this does not mean thatactualvictims are more likely to have Dark Triad traits. Rather, people with Dark Triad traits are more likely to disguise themselves as victims in order to extract some kind of reward or benefit.
To be clear, this does not mean that
victims are more likely to have Dark Triad traits. Rather, people with Dark Triad traits are more likely to disguise themselves as victims in order to extract some kind of reward or benefit.
People who score highly on Dark Triad personality traits weaponize fake victimhood because it can be a useful asset to get what they want.
From what I can tell, people who have gone through serious hardships are often extremely reluctant to speak about it. Theres a sense of shame and self-consciousness there. But people who have led relatively privileged lives often enjoy accentuating their hardships or co-opting the hardships of people with similar characteristics as themselves, because this can advance their professional or material interests.
Whenever we hear stories of mistreatment or hardship, we are faced with two options:
1. We can take every story seriously and risk being exploited by free riders. Dark Triad types can make up or embellish stories and extract rewards despite not having truly suffered.
2. Conversely, we can carefully scrutinize peoples stories to ensure we arent being duped, but risk overlooking actual victims who need help.
This is not necessarily an easy tightrope to walk. Sympathetic and compassionate people might prefer to lean in the direction of false positives, accepting every hardship story even if it comes with the possibility of being duped. More impartial and disagreeable people might prefer to lean in the direction of false negatives, closely evaluating every case of hardship and assuming a stance of suspicion even if it comes with the risk of mistakenly deserting those in need.
Very few people are honest about this tradeoff. And often refuse to acknowledge that certain people will indeed free ride on the sympathy of others if the opportunity is available.
Relatedly, there was an interestingpaperabout the evolutionary logic ofaversive medical treatmentsthat was published in 2019.
Relatedly, there was an interesting
about the evolutionary logic of
that was published in 2019.
Imagine youre in a hunter-gatherer community 20 thousand years ago. You and your band are on a hunt for a dangerous animal or out on a risky mission to raid another group. One guy in your band says, Oh man, sorry guys, Im not feeling well, Ill hang back. It would be unwise for you to unquestioningly accept this. One way to help verify whether the guy is truly feeling unwell is the collective knowledge that when he returns to the camp, hes going to ingest some repulsive medicine that causes him intense suffering. Imposing a cost like this prevents the possibility of exploitation.
Basically, the authors of this paper suggest that the vast documented history of aversive and unpleasant medical treatments such as bitter medicines, drilling, amputation, leeches, bloodletting, and so on are all costly methods of screening for fakers and free riders. The goal is to ensure that people are truly sick or injured, and to prevent exploitation by imposing costs to potential frauds.
If everyone in the group unquestionably accepts any claim to feeling sick or injured without evidence, then very quickly you would have a community of layabouts. A group of people where no one was willing to do anything other than receive care. Why risk going on a dangerous hunt when you could pretend to be sick, and allow others to hunt and bring you the meat?
But then the others would adopt this same strategy, and the community would quickly unravel. Thus, aversive treatments. You can even see some of this today. When kids pretend to be sick to stay home from school, sometimes parents will bring out the disgusting cough syrup, or tell the child they are about to embark on a long and boring trip to the doctors office. Sometimes kids will relent and go to school.
This reminds me of a story documented by primatologists about baboons. They observed a small young baboon sitting alone. He observed a nearby older female baboon digging up some nutritious roots from the ground. Suddenly, the young baboon shrieked as if he were in pain, and fell over. The young baboons mother came out of nowhere and determined that the older female baboon must have hurt her son. She then chased the older female away. The young baboon then sat up, walked over to the nutritious roots the older female had dug up, and started eating them. Clever free riders have many tricks up their sleeves.
Finally, weve arrived at success games. These games are about doing impressive things, getting promotions, money, influence, education, wealth, and so on.
This falls under the category of prestige. Success is generally determined by whether you can confer benefits to others. People win success games by being promoted, earning money, winning awards, prevailing in sports contests, and so on.
Relevant to this discussion about success is that a lot of our behavior around social signaling is itself related to where we are on the status ladder. Very successful people can often engage in counter-signaling, or doing things that are apparently low status but actually dont harm their status in the way it would for most others.
Heres an example from the advertising executive Rory Sutherland: If you work at Pizza Hut and you ride a bike to work, its because you probably cant afford a car. It was a necessity not a choice.
But if youre a top executive and you ride a bike to work, its a high status activity because it was a choice and not a necessity.
The simplified model: Low status signal is riding a bike to work; medium status signal is driving an expensive car to work; high status is riding a bike to work.
You can see this with restaurant menus too.
Cheap fast food restaurant menu: Hamburger
Mid-tier chain restaurant: Wood-fired sizzled USDA grade beef on our house made sesame bun
Upscale chic restaurant: Hamburger
Counter-signaling, such as the CEO riding a bicycle to work, or the upscale chic restaurant with the minimalist menu, is an expression of confidence. Of feeling secure in ones position.
An intriguingstudyfrom my friend Zachariah Brown found that PhD students at lower-ranked universities used more linguistic complexity in their dissertation titles. In contrast, doctoral students at high-ranked institutions used more simple language. For those at higher-ranked universities, its as if theyre communicating that they have little need to impress you with how sophisticated the title is, because they already study at an elite program and thus have nothing to prove.
An intriguing
from my friend Zachariah Brown found that PhD students at lower-ranked universities used more linguistic complexity in their dissertation titles. In contrast, doctoral students at high-ranked institutions used more simple language. For those at higher-ranked universities, its as if theyre communicating that they have little need to impress you with how sophisticated the title is, because they already study at an elite program and thus have nothing to prove.
At some universities, they reserve parking spots for Nobel prize winners. Youre far more likely to see those spaces occupied by a basic sedan or a 15 year old beater than a luxury vehicle or sports car. I won a Nobel prize, I dont need to impress anyone with how expensive my car is. Im too busy advancing the limits of our knowledge. Obviously this isnt a conscious thought, anymore than a spider thinks to itself Im weaving this web to catch flies to obtain calories and thereby stay alive. Certain behaviors involving counter-signaling seem to come naturally to many of us once we reach a certain position in an organization or in society.
Other examples of counter-signaling include having a very simple social media bio, or wearing casual clothing to work.
Interestingly, some forms of counter-signaling can backfire. One notable example is self-deprecating humor. There was astudysome years ago that found that when high-status individuals made fun of themselves, people reported liking the person more. But when a low-status person made fun of themselves, people reported liking the person less. Counter-signaling, in this case highlighting ones flaws, seems to only increase status if youre already relatively well-regarded.
Interestingly, some forms of counter-signaling can backfire. One notable example is self-deprecating humor. There was a
some years ago that found that when high-status individuals made fun of themselves, people reported liking the person more. But when a low-status person made fun of themselves, people reported liking the person less. Counter-signaling, in this case highlighting ones flaws, seems to only increase status if youre already relatively well-regarded.
This is similar to the Pratfall effect. This is a classic finding from social psychology which finds that when a successful person makes a mistake, people subsequently find them to be more likeable. I think this is why, for example, youll sometimes see in romantic comedies the attractive and successful female lead is a klutz. Theyll trip and fall or spill their coffee on their boss or something like that, and this endears the audience to her. If you saw an unattractive and unsuccessful person do something similar, you would likely have a different response.
Arriving fashionably late is another example of how counter-signaling only works for prominent individuals. If you are trying to work your way up in the world, its best to arrive at social events early because youll have more time to form friendships, seek out profitable opportunities, and build your social network. But if you are already established, then you can arrive late and wont lose much in the way of opportunities.
Lastly, Ill mention humility. In their bookHidden Games, the MIT social scientists Erez Yoeli and Moshe Hoffman point out that successful people with lots of positive attributes can afford to be modest because the odds are that at least one of their good traits will be uncovered over the period of a social interaction. In contrast, less successful people with only one particular strength will be eager to show it, because its all they have.
Lastly, Ill mention humility. In their book
, the MIT social scientists Erez Yoeli and Moshe Hoffman point out that successful people with lots of positive attributes can afford to be modest because the odds are that at least one of their good traits will be uncovered over the period of a social interaction. In contrast, less successful people with only one particular strength will be eager to show it, because its all they have.
Very few people like braggarts, but never speaking about accomplishments can be a bad strategy for people who are still trying to achieve some success for themselves. In contrast, humility can be an attractive quality in someone who has done a lot in their life.
Well now transition to a brief discussion of the complexities ofstatus ambiguity. The sociologist Roger V. Gould wrote about this topic inCollision of Wills. His basic thesis is that status ambiguity and status equivalence are more likely than other social arrangements to give rise to violence and conflict. In contrast, when there is a clear hierarchy, disputes are far less likely to break out.
Well now transition to a brief discussion of the complexities of
. The sociologist Roger V. Gould wrote about this topic in
. His basic thesis is that status ambiguity and status equivalence are more likely than other social arrangements to give rise to violence and conflict. In contrast, when there is a clear hierarchy, disputes are far less likely to break out.
Across different cultures, homicides are more likely to occur between individuals of roughly equal social status. When researchers attempt to control for the amount of time spent with various individuals, they still that equal status predicts greater odds of homicide.
Status symmetry giving rise to conflict even occurs within families. Brothers are more likely to kill brothers than sisters. And sisters are more likely to kill sisters than brothers (though, unsurprisingly, brothers do more killing overall). A son is far more likely to kill his father than his mother, while a daughter is more likely to kill her mother than her father.
This is analogous to size disparities among animals. When a conflict arises between two animals with a large size disparity, violence is unlikely to result. This is because the smaller animal usually will quickly submit, aware that the larger animal is likely to inflict serious injury or death.
But when two animals are roughly equal in size, the only way to know for sure who will win is if they actually fight, and thus, violence is more likely to break out.
Size might be a factor in dominance disputes between humans, too. In an amusingstudyfrom 2015, researchers observed people trying to pass in opposite directions on a narrow sidewalk. They found that when two people of the same sex walked in opposite directions, the shorter person yielded to the taller person 67% of the time. When they controlled for estimated age, the shorter person gave way to the taller person 75% of the time.
Size might be a factor in dominance disputes between humans, too. In an amusing
from 2015, researchers observed people trying to pass in opposite directions on a narrow sidewalk. They found that when two people of the same sex walked in opposite directions, the shorter person yielded to the taller person 67% of the time. When they controlled for estimated age, the shorter person gave way to the taller person 75% of the time.
Clearly specified status designators can reduce conflictrules like the boss decides, and ladies first," and "listen to your elders.
You may be wondering about something I mentionedbefore, about how hunter-gatherer communities have been largely egalitarian. That is true. And its also true that violence in existing small-scale hunter-gatherer communities is far more common than even the most dangerous U.S. cities today. In hunter-gatherer societies, roughly 1 in 7 men die as a result of homicide. A global assessment of 31 hunter-gatherer societies found that 64% of them engaged in warfare once every two years. In some hunter-gatherer societies, such as the Yanomamo in Brazil, a quarter of all young male deaths are due to homicide, mostly about conflicts over women.
You may be wondering about something I mentioned
, about how hunter-gatherer communities have been largely egalitarian. That is true. And its also true that violence in existing small-scale hunter-gatherer communities is far more common than even the most dangerous U.S. cities today. In hunter-gatherer societies, roughly 1 in 7 men die as a result of homicide. A global assessment of 31 hunter-gatherer societies found that 64% of them engaged in warfare once every two years. In some hunter-gatherer societies, such as the Yanomamo in Brazil, a quarter of all young male deaths are due to homicide, mostly about conflicts over women.
Anthropologists used to believe conflicts in this communities broke out due to insufficient resources or scarcity of food or protein. The Harvard psychologist Steven Pinker haspointed outthat, Modern people have trouble believing that preliterate tribes go to war over women...Across the world, the best-fed foraging peoples are the most warlike. When [the anthropologist] Chagnon mentioned the meat-shortage hypothesis to his Yanomamo informants, they laughed incredulously and said, Even though we like meat, we like women a whole lot more.
Anthropologists used to believe conflicts in this communities broke out due to insufficient resources or scarcity of food or protein. The Harvard psychologist Steven Pinker has
that, Modern people have trouble believing that preliterate tribes go to war over women...Across the world, the best-fed foraging peoples are the most warlike. When [the anthropologist] Chagnon mentioned the meat-shortage hypothesis to his Yanomamo informants, they laughed incredulously and said, Even though we like meat, we like women a whole lot more.
A recurring theme in this set of lectures: One important underlying, largely unconscious, aim of succeeding in status games is to be more attractive to the opposite sex.
Okay, lets end here. Next time well discuss status as it relates to social class.
This is the sixth transcript in this series of lectures I delivered in Miami in 2023. Links for thefirst,second,third,fourth, andfifthlectures.
This is the sixth transcript in this series of lectures I delivered in Miami in 2023. Links for the
,
,
,
, and
lectures.

Comments
Restacks
Esme Fae
Esme Fae
Esme Fae
Esme Fae
Esme Fae
Mar 15, 2024
Regarding countersignaling, I grew up in a very wealthy town with a lot of old money families who had lived there for generations; and an increasing number of nouveau riche people moving in during the 80s and 90s.  You could easily tell the difference because the old money people drove beat-up Volvos and wore faded khakis and battered boat shoes, and the women tended to wear minimal jewelry and makeup.  The nouveau riche men wore flashy suits, the women wore a lot of jewelry and makeup, and they drove expensive new cars.   There seemed to be a bit of friction between the nouveau riche and the old money - I remember one nouveau riche guy suing the town because he discovered after buying his million-dollar home that it wasnt in the towns main zip code (the town was quite spread out and had four zip codes - he wanted to be in the central one as he apparently felt no one would be impressed by the other three).
Regarding countersignaling, I grew up in a very wealthy town with a lot of old money families who had lived there for generations; and an increasing number of nouveau riche people moving in during the 80s and 90s.  You could easily tell the difference because the old money people drove beat-up Volvos and wore faded khakis and battered boat shoes, and the women tended to wear minimal jewelry and makeup.  The nouveau riche men wore flashy suits, the women wore a lot of jewelry and makeup, and they drove expensive new cars.   There seemed to be a bit of friction between the nouveau riche and the old money - I remember one nouveau riche guy suing the town because he discovered after buying his million-dollar home that it wasnt in the towns main zip code (the town was quite spread out and had four zip codes - he wanted to be in the central one as he apparently felt no one would be impressed by the other three).
Like (9)
Reply
Share
Scott Gibb
Scott Gibb
Trim to Truth
Trim to Truth
Trim to Truth
Mar 15, 2024
Arriving fashionably late is another example of how counter-signaling only works for prominent individuals. If you are trying to work your way up in the world, its best to arrive at social events early because youll have more time to form friendships, seek out profitable opportunities, and build your social network. But if you are already established, then you can arrive late and wont lose much in the way of opportunities.  The most well established male in my high school would often arrive first with his girlfriend at house parties.  I was an up-in comer, so I would arrive very early, but usually second.  He would already be very buzzed; 40oz mostly consumed and within 10-30 minutes after the start of the party, under much handshaking with the host and goodbyes he and his girl would get up and leave.  I was baffled.  Why is he showing up 30-60 minutes before everyone else and then walking out promptly at 8pm?  No one could pull that off except him.  It appeared as if there had been a pre-party in which only the most elite were invited.  Then his very early departure signaled that he had somewhere more important to beeither solo time with his girlfriend or to a better party.  It seemed like a status game and probably was, but years later I found out that what had been going on is that he and his girlfriend had to get back to their infant baby who was being taken care of by a babysitter at home.
Arriving fashionably late is another example of how counter-signaling only works for prominent individuals. If you are trying to work your way up in the world, its best to arrive at social events early because youll have more time to form friendships, seek out profitable opportunities, and build your social network. But if you are already established, then you can arrive late and wont lose much in the way of opportunities.  The most well established male in my high school would often arrive first with his girlfriend at house parties.  I was an up-in comer, so I would arrive very early, but usually second.  He would already be very buzzed; 40oz mostly consumed and within 10-30 minutes after the start of the party, under much handshaking with the host and goodbyes he and his girl would get up and leave.  I was baffled.  Why is he showing up 30-60 minutes before everyone else and then walking out promptly at 8pm?  No one could pull that off except him.  It appeared as if there had been a pre-party in which only the most elite were invited.  Then his very early departure signaled that he had somewhere more important to beeither solo time with his girlfriend or to a better party.  It seemed like a status game and probably was, but years later I found out that what had been going on is that he and his girlfriend had to get back to their infant baby who was being taken care of by a babysitter at home.
Like (3)
Reply
Share
Top
Latest
Discussions

Rob Henderson

Rob Henderson

Rob Henderson

Rob Henderson

Rob Henderson

Rob Henderson

Rob Henderson

Rob Henderson

Rob Henderson

Rob Henderson


undefined subscriptions will be displayed on your profile (edit)
Skip for now
For your security, we need to re-authenticate you.
Click the link we sent to sasha.p.podolsky@gmail.com, orclick here to sign in.