

1
Book meeting
Book a meeting

Subscribed
Share
Share
Give a gift subscription
Give a gift subscription
Ive been listening to lectures for acoursetitled Understanding Human Emotions by Dr. Lawrence Ian Reed, a Clinical Professor of Psychology at New York University.
Ive been listening to lectures for a
titled Understanding Human Emotions by Dr. Lawrence Ian Reed, a Clinical Professor of Psychology at New York University.
Here are my notes onlecture 1andlecture 2. I remember learning a lot of this stuff in college and in my doctoral program. A useful refresher for me. A good overview for anyone with an interest in the psychology of emotions.
Here are my notes on
and
. I remember learning a lot of this stuff in college and in my doctoral program. A useful refresher for me. A good overview for anyone with an interest in the psychology of emotions.
Below are my highlights, notes and reactions to lectures 3 and 4.
[In square brackets are thoughts/notes I jotted while listening]:
The frequency and intensity of someones emotions predict how close they feel with another person
Were more willing to express emotions around people we feel close to. This is true not just for positive emotions, but for negative ones, too, particularly for women
Anger and hostility, particularly for women, are shown primarily toward those theyre intimate with. Physical aggression, especially for women, likewise mostly takes place within intimate relationships.
Conversely, the absence of strong and intense emotions is associated with reduced feelings of closeness in a social or romantic relationship
Studies indicate that among married couples, the absence of emotional expression when discussing conflict is a significant predictor of divorce
[The late comedian Patrice ONeal had a dating advice show back in the day. He often said that its better, as a man, if a woman hates you than if she feels nothing toward you. You can turn that negative emotional valence into something positive, ONeal claimed, but you cant turn pure disinterest into attraction.]
If one individual in a relationship suppresses his or her emotional expressions, the other is likely to experience a heightened stress response.
[This reminds me of the still face experiment. Here is an example]:
[Some biologists theorize that the mother-infant bond is the biological template for romantic relationships. Essentially, the feeling of love first arose among primate mothers caring for their infants, and then this was co-opted and extended to include romantic love.]
Why did laughter evolve? What problem did laughter evolve to solve? One function seems to be affiliative. Laughter signals in-group membership.
In one study, people listened to a standup comedian. Researchers added canned laughter to the audio track. They told one group of listeners that the audience members were members of the same political party. They told a different group of listeners that the laughing audience members were of a different political party. The result was that people laughed and smiled more when they were told that the audience was composed of people of the same political party as themselves.
People also use laughter to ostracize or repel out-group members. Laughing at out-group members can foster bonding among in-group members.
[Of course, laughter also serves a romantic function as well. In his book on friendship, Robin Dunbar reports studies of laughter under naturalistic conditions which find that women are much more likely to laugh at something men said than they were at anything a woman saidperhaps because men try especially hard to make women laugh. Relatedly, men were less likely to smile at either sex than women.]
Emotions serve 3 affiliative functions that enhance social bonding:
Signaling
Support
Social change
Signaling. Facial expressions signal information about a persons internal emotional state. When others express their emotions to us, they signal information about themselves
Using other peoples facial expressions as feedback for how we behave is sometimes referred to as social appraisal
Support. Expressing emotions elicits support. For example, studies about crying indicate that people are more likely to cry around people with whom they feel close. Tears serve to elicit support, because those close to you are the most likely to be willing to help you
[This is an example of how a behavior can be strategic and adaptive without being conscious. No normal person thinks to themselves, Oh this person is close to me, so if I cry they will be more likely to offer help and support. Rather, you just feel more comfortable around someone with whom you feel close, and are thus more prone to crying, which in turn elicits support from them. No conscious thought required.]
Social change. This refers to repairing relationships after a mishap; expressions of remorse, shame, guilt, embarrassment, and so on all serve to sustain relationships
When viewing someone commit a social or moral transgression, people evaluate the person more positively if he or she subsequently exhibits expressions indicating embarrassment, shame, and regret. This indicates that the person is unlikely to commit similar actions again
In addition to promoting affiliation, emotions can also promote distancing. Emotions that promote social bonding are socially engaging, emotions with distancing functions aredisengaging
In addition to promoting affiliation, emotions can also promote distancing. Emotions that promote social bonding are socially engaging, emotions with distancing functions are
engaging
These socially disengaging emotions include anger, contempt, fear, disgust, schadenfreude, and pride
We experience anger when someone is blocking us from reaching our goals. Anger motivates us to removing or influencing whatever obstacle is preventing us from doing what we want. When another person elicits anger from us, anger motivates us to get them to yield and stop blocking us from our goals.
The emotion of anger provides information that the person will carry through with their threats, even if it causes them to experience outsize costs or penalties
[As I wrotehere, anger can be expressed by inflicting costs or withdrawing benefits.]
[As I wrote
, anger can be expressed by inflicting costs or withdrawing benefits.]
[Interestingly, stronger men are more prone to anger than weaker men because stronger men are in a better position to inflict costs. Stronger women are not more prone to anger than weaker women, but physically attractive women are more prone to anger than less attractive women because they're in a better position to withdraw benefits.]
[The evolutionary purpose of social anger is to bargain for better treatment. In my conversation with Chris Williamson, Isuggestedthat this emotion sometimes misfires and causes us to inflict costs on inanimate objects. You see impulsive guys banging their fists on car engines or breaking an Xbox controller because they are upset that these things arent working the way they want.]
[The evolutionary purpose of social anger is to bargain for better treatment. In my conversation with Chris Williamson, I
that this emotion sometimes misfires and causes us to inflict costs on inanimate objects. You see impulsive guys banging their fists on car engines or breaking an Xbox controller because they are upset that these things arent working the way they want.]
Fearful expressions, for their part, increase credibility of claims of danger. People who view individuals expressing fear are more likely to believe them when they say they are in danger, relative to people with neutral expressions
[Interestingly, people who score highly on psychopathy areviewedas having particularly authentic emotional expressions, despite the fact that psychopathy is associated with blunted emotions, especially sadness and remorse. The reason is that psychopathically oriented people are often talented at mimicking authentic emotional expression, and exaggerate emotions in order to elicit the desired response from others. In qualitative interviews, psychopaths will confess to watching television shows and movies and then going to a mirror and practicing the emotions they see. Actors are already imitating and to some extent slightly exaggerating how the express emotions, and psychopaths then imitate this imitation, further embellishing the expressions associated with various emotions.]
[Interestingly, people who score highly on psychopathy are
as having particularly authentic emotional expressions, despite the fact that psychopathy is associated with blunted emotions, especially sadness and remorse. The reason is that psychopathically oriented people are often talented at mimicking authentic emotional expression, and exaggerate emotions in order to elicit the desired response from others. In qualitative interviews, psychopaths will confess to watching television shows and movies and then going to a mirror and practicing the emotions they see. Actors are already imitating and to some extent slightly exaggerating how the express emotions, and psychopaths then imitate this imitation, further embellishing the expressions associated with various emotions.]
Emotions choreograph changes in our minds and bodies in ways that are adaptive (promote survival and reproduction) in specific situations that we find ourselves in
[Our emotions evolved in the context of small hunter-gatherer societies before the rise of agriculture roughly 10-12 thousand years ago. Because culture and technology evolve faster than biology, our emotions are adaptive for those small-scale communities, but our emotions are not necessarily adaptive in the same way in modern advanced societies]
Early psychologists including William James believed that emotions arose from our intellectual perception of these physiological changes. For instance, you see your best friend, your heartrate raises, and then you determine from this bodily response that you feel excited
But this cant be right, because sometimes you recognize that your emotional state has shifted even before you are aware of your bodily responses. For example, in a social situation you can instantly feel embarrassed and only a few seconds later will you notice that your cheeks are blushing
Darwin hypothesized a bidirectional communication system between our emotions and our facial expressions
In other words, we feel certain emotions and then our facial expressions change. But in addition, when we change our facial expressions, we can subsequently feel our emotions change
Modern empirical psychologists including Paul Ekman have instructed study participants to make certain facial expressions for ten seconds, such as expressions of anger, fear, disgust and so on, and then measured their physiological responses
After ten seconds of holding these expressions, participants experienced changes in their bodily states. The researchers found changes in heart rate, skin temperature, and muscle activity. Increases in heart rate accompanied expressions of fear, anger, and sadness, but not for disgust.
Skin temperature rose for in response to expressions of anger but not fear. This is because blood moves quickly to the palms when were angry in order to prepare us for combat
In contrast, blood remains close to the chest when were afraid in order to support flight-related locomotion
Other studies have found similar results for other facial expressions of emotions
Though overall evidence is mixed, some research suggests that deliberately making expressions characteristic of various emotions can induce the feeling states specific to those emotions
There is a mismatch between our stress-response systems and the stressors that we now face
The fight-or-flight system activates in response to short-term threats, with the function of protecting us from those threats
In the ancestral environment, stress was rapid and fleeting in the context of combat or encountering a dangerous animal. Today, stress can be prolonged in response to problems at our jobs, or in our relationships, contemplation of our future
Emotions function as solutions to problems faced by our human ancestors over the course of evolutionary history
Emotions assisted our ancestors in surviving and reproducing. Fear helped them escape from or repel potential threats in the environment; disgust motivates individuals to protect themselves from potentially harmful pathogens
Emotions are also crucial in building and maintaining social bonds. They have two specific social functions
The first is affiliative; motivating us to form positive relationships; expressed by love, happiness, affection, and gratitude. Affiliative bonds are also sustained by remorse (accepting that youve hurt someone), embarrassment (experience of social devaluation), and sadness (seeking comfort from others)
The second function is distancing; motivating us to maintain our social position relative to others. This function is expressed by disdain (desire to exclude someone), rage (desire to confront, ridicule, or strike someone), disgust (desire to withdraw or isolate yourself), and schadenfreude (experience of joy at someone elses adversity).
On one hand, were motivated to maintain close relationships. On the other hand, were motivated maintain our positions and sense of self. We evolved toget alongandget ahead, sometimes having to make compromises between these competing aims
On one hand, were motivated to maintain close relationships. On the other hand, were motivated maintain our positions and sense of self. We evolved to
and
, sometimes having to make compromises between these competing aims
The social functions of emotions are not always what we intend them to be. For example, anger, contempt, and hate can be useful if they allow us to distance ourselves from potentially harmful relationships. However, those same emotions can be socially dysfunctional if they are aimed at those who pose no threat or have no power to harm us
The same can be said for pride, happiness, or love. If actions associated with those emotions are expressed at the wrong moment or in an inappropriate context, you can subsequently increase rather than reduce how much risk or danger you experience
The emotions we express influence others, and others emotional expressions influence us. More on this point in the next lecture.
To receive new posts, access more than100 premium archived posts, and support my work, consider becoming a free or paid subscriber.
Subscribed

Comments
Restacks
Frank Lee
Frank Lee
The Social Misfit Newsletter
The Social Misfit Newsletter
The Social Misfit Newsletter
Jul 18
It seems to me that human transcendence to a next level of evolution requires both a deep emotional intelligence and the ability to compartmentalize emotions to mange their destructive influence with choice.  It seems we are going backwards on this... societal changes that attempt to mainstream uncontrolled emotions as effective justification for choice.
It seems to me that human transcendence to a next level of evolution requires both a deep emotional intelligence and the ability to compartmentalize emotions to mange their destructive influence with choice.  It seems we are going backwards on this... societal changes that attempt to mainstream uncontrolled emotions as effective justification for choice.
Like (2)
Reply
Share
T Benedict
T Benedict
T Benedict
T Benedict
T Benedict
Jul 20
Two comments - First, about laughter's link to romantic function; my wife told me early on in our relationship that she was attracted to men who made her laugh, even if they were ugly. I can be a funny guy if I try...I keep that in mind even after 35 years of marriage. Second, the power of sincere apology after a social transgression or faux pas can work. I recall reading an article by a guy whose company specialized in helping people or companies that had some sort of public humiliation, misdeed, crime, or wrongdoing. One of the steps was to fall on your sword and admit the error.
Two comments - First, about laughter's link to romantic function; my wife told me early on in our relationship that she was attracted to men who made her laugh, even if they were ugly. I can be a funny guy if I try...I keep that in mind even after 35 years of marriage. Second, the power of sincere apology after a social transgression or faux pas can work. I recall reading an article by a guy whose company specialized in helping people or companies that had some sort of public humiliation, misdeed, crime, or wrongdoing. One of the steps was to fall on your sword and admit the error.
Like (1)
Reply
Share
Top
Latest
Discussions

Rob Henderson

Rob Henderson

Rob Henderson

Rob Henderson

Rob Henderson

Rob Henderson

Rob Henderson

Rob Henderson

Rob Henderson

Rob Henderson


undefined subscriptions will be displayed on your profile (edit)
Skip for now
For your security, we need to re-authenticate you.
Click the link we sent to sasha.p.podolsky@gmail.com, orclick here to sign in.
Info
Shopping








0:00/2:49

0:00
/
2:49


