

1
Book meeting
Book a meeting
Subscribed
Share
Share
Give a gift subscription
Give a gift subscription
A lot of people feel uneasy about buying something without the reassurance of a recognizable name.
You intuitively understand that a person or a brand with a strong reputation is putting their credibility on the line when they endorse or promote a product.
In his bookAlchemy:The Dark Art and Curious Science of Creating Magic in Brands, Business, and Life, the British ad-man Rory Sutherland describes this as the Reputation Reflex.
In his book
:
, the British ad-man Rory Sutherland describes this as the Reputation Reflex.
We are drawn to signals of honesty and credibility, and we choose to pay for items when we find those signals. We do this instinctively, Sutherland observes, and what we are prepared to pay for something is affected not only by the item itself but by the trustworthiness and reputation of the person selling it.
You can apply this logic to book blurbs. A book blurb is a quote from someone who says something positive about you or your book.
What purpose do blurbs serve?
There are more than 500,000 books published each year in the US alone. How is a potential reader supposed to know that yours is actually good? How are they supposed to know that you and your book are worth their time and money? Its so incredibly hard to sell books, so people gather blurbs in the hopes that such testimonials will help. Traditional publishing doesnt tell you thisthey want to sell you the dreambut even ridiculously successful authors usually still need a day job. Erik Hoel haspointed outthat making a living as a book author is as rare as being a billionaire.Troubledwas successful as far as books go but it does not keep me financially afloat. This Substack has made me way more money than my book.
There are more than 500,000 books published each year in the US alone. How is a potential reader supposed to know that yours is actually good? How are they supposed to know that you and your book are worth their time and money? Its so incredibly hard to sell books, so people gather blurbs in the hopes that such testimonials will help. Traditional publishing doesnt tell you thisthey want to sell you the dreambut even ridiculously successful authors usually still need a day job. Erik Hoel has
that making a living as a book author is as rare as being a billionaire.
was successful as far as books go but it does not keep me financially afloat. This Substack has made me way more money than my book.
Blurbs used to be reserved for the hardcover. Now, theyre everywhere. In an era where we are inundated with information, social proof helps us to identify things well like or at at the very least filter out things well dislike.
A strong blurb can generate buzz and get your book more attention from your publisher, at book conferences, among booksellers, and in trade reviews. Asking for blurbs is awkward for any author, but its especially tough for debut authors. I was in a fortunate position because by the time I finished my manuscript, Id been tweeting and writing online for a few years and had been on a few high-profile podcasts, which established relationships with people who were later willing to read and endorse my book.
The purpose of a blurb:
Signal that the book is important
Provide social proof that the author is important
Help readers see the book is relevant to them
Most importantly, convince a potential reader to buy the book
Most people do not pay attention to what the blurbs actually say because blurbs are uniformly positive. No one is going to put a bad blurb on their book or on their promo materials.
Instead, people pay attention towhogave the blurb. And judge your book based on that.
Instead, people pay attention to
gave the blurb. And judge your book based on that.
The more weight and credibility and status the endorser holds, the more powerful the blurb. You are borrowing some credibility and status from the person providing the blurb, and hoping it bolsters interest in your book. You can also get blurbs from people who have high status positions as well. The point is that you are trying to borrow the credibility and authority of a person. This can be conveyed by the persons position or job title, even if the person isnt famous (e.g., Jane Smith, CEO of Famous Company).
The key consideration here is to focus on asking people who fit two criteria:
They are known to the audience youre trying to reach, or have jobs or titles that are credible to that audience.
You already know them enough to reach out to them.
One thing I found shocking is that, to my knowledge, there has never been a study on whether blurbs really work. There is a complete absence of comprehensive, empirical studies that conclusively determine the effectiveness of blurbs in driving book sales.
My guess is that they do. Show people two identical book covers but only one of them has a glowing blurb from Jerry Seinfeld (or some other A-list celeb), the obvious prediction is that the Seinfeld-approved cover will attract more interest. It is fascinating to me that in the post-moneyball, post-data analytics, post big-data era, we dont actually have an answer to this question.
The process of asking for blurbs is uncomfortable. Especially for first time authors. It was for me. My book was an unusual case, which Ill describe later in this post.
In this highly scientific and representative survey, the majority of respondents say that blurbs have influenced their decision to buy a book.
The reason I ran this poll is because there is an ongoing discussion about blurbs.
New York Times:
Wall Street Journal:
Slate:

Book publishing has long been consumed by this debate over blurbs.
What happened was an arms race. People figured out blurbs helped, so more effort was put into getting them, until a point was reached where they didnt necessarily make a positive difference; its just not having them would likely ruin a books chances.
Sean Manning, the Simon & Schuster publisher, has announced that blurbs are no longer required for authors. I believe the insistence on blurbs has become incredibly damaging to what should be our industrys ultimate goal: producing books of the highest possible quality, Manning wrote in arecent essayin Publishers Weekly. It takes a lot of time to produce great books, and trying to get blurbs is not a good use of anyones time. Further, he argued, blurbing was a kind of cronyism, one that rewards connections over talent. For that reason, Manning went on, Simon & Schuster will no longer require authors to obtain blurbs for their books.
Sean Manning, the Simon & Schuster publisher, has announced that blurbs are no longer required for authors. I believe the insistence on blurbs has become incredibly damaging to what should be our industrys ultimate goal: producing books of the highest possible quality, Manning wrote in a
in Publishers Weekly. It takes a lot of time to produce great books, and trying to get blurbs is not a good use of anyones time. Further, he argued, blurbing was a kind of cronyism, one that rewards connections over talent. For that reason, Manning went on, Simon & Schuster will no longer require authors to obtain blurbs for their books.
Heres what I thought was the most interesting part of his essay: "In no other artistic industry is this common. How often does a blurb from a filmmaker appear on another filmmakers movie poster? A blurb from a musician on another musicians album cover?"
Its a good point. One possible reason for this difference is that reading a book is  more effortful than the comparatively passive activities of watching a film or listening to a song.
Thus, readers want to be extra certain that a book is worth their time, effort, and money. And if a new book hasnt been reviewed by a trusted outlet and doesnt have many reviews on Amazon or Goodreads, then how else can a reader judge a book? By its cover? Theres not much else to go on. So people naturally rely on social proof and outsource some of their decision making to trusted people who blurb the book.
Theres also the matter of pride from the seeker of the blurb. Someone (I think it was Simon Leys) once said that everything he ever wrote was ultimately aimed at impressing just two or three authors he greatly admired. As an author, there is a unique satisfaction in receiving a glowing endorsement from someone whose writing you respect.
Sixty percent of nonfiction bestsellersare notwritten by the authortheyre written by ghostwriters.
Sixty percent of nonfiction bestsellers
written by the authortheyre written by ghostwriters.
The rule of thumb for nonfiction is that if the supposed author of a book is not a writer by occupation, then it was a ghostwriter. Which is fine. But its weird that most of the time the ghostwriters name isnt on the book cover. The ghostwriter interviews the subject over the course of weeks or months or perhaps years and does the actual writing. But the author gets the credit.
Think about how strange that is.
Imagine I decided I wanted to be known as a painter. I hire a ghost painter. He interviews me over the course of a few weeks asking how I want the image to look. I pay him and he creates the artwork. I add my signature to the final product and get the credit for it.
There's a concept called "vanity publishing" in which a rich person writes a book him or herself and then pays a publisher an exorbitant sum to publish it. This is absurd.
But not nearly as absurd as paying a middleman to write the book, getting it published by a respected publisher, and then taking the credit for it yourself. Its similar to hosting a dinner party and your guests effusively praise you for cooking the meal, meanwhile you have a professional chef in the kitchen doing all of the actual work.
You chose the menu, you selected the ingredients, you provided input on the preparation, chopped a few vegetables, and maybe assisted with the plating. But ultimately, the reason the meal is so good is because of the pro chef.
You paid him well to keep his mouth shut and go along with the fiction that you are the one who is responsible for the delicious dinner.
What's even weirder is this: What if the dinner guestsknowthat there is a professional chef in the kitchen banging pots and pans around and doing all the heavy lifting, but still praise thehostfor the quality, taste, and aesthetics of the meal? Participating in a ruse.
What's even weirder is this: What if the dinner guests
that there is a professional chef in the kitchen banging pots and pans around and doing all the heavy lifting, but still praise the
for the quality, taste, and aesthetics of the meal? Participating in a ruse.
And what if the dinner host receives awards and praise and accolades for how amazing his or her cooking is (despite the meals being prepared by the pro chef they hired)?
Its also interesting how people only want to take credit for creative or intellectual work. There's no such thing as a "ghost plumber." No one hires a guy to fix their sink and then tells everyone he did it himself. The ghostwriting phenomenon bothers me for at least 2 reasons.
1. It signals false information about the supposed author
2. Even when we know there is a ghostwriter involved, people feel compelled to participate in the ruse that the person who paid a ton of money is responsible for the product.
Sometimes authors actually do credit the ghost writer on the cover of their book. All of them should do this, imo.
The ghostwriter Andrew Crofts hassaidthe ghostwriter fulfils the vanity of those who want their name on the cover of a book but who, for the life of them, cannot write. Donald Trump didnt writeThe Art of the Deal. Kamala Harris didnt writeThe Truths We Hold. Shocking. I know.
The ghostwriter Andrew Crofts has
the ghostwriter fulfils the vanity of those who want their name on the cover of a book but who, for the life of them, cannot write. Donald Trump didnt write
. Kamala Harris didnt write
. Shocking. I know.
I share Tim Ferrisss view when hesaysIm not going to claim to write a book I didnt write. That shit drives me bananas. If you want to call yourself a bestselling interviewee thats fine. But if you didnt write your book please dont call yourself a bestselling author.
I share Tim Ferrisss view when he
Im not going to claim to write a book I didnt write. That shit drives me bananas. If you want to call yourself a bestselling interviewee thats fine. But if you didnt write your book please dont call yourself a bestselling author.
There are exceptions to the rule of thumbBarack Obama and J.D. Vance wrote their own books. Both are smart guys who read a lot. (I strongly doubt Trump or Harris read books).
I sent J.D. and Usha a copy ofTroubledabout a year before it was published. I figured J.D. would be too busy to read it (hed just become a senator) so I wrote a few blurbs for him and asked if he would approve one of them. He replied saying Usha read it first, and that he was nearly finished reading it. A few weeks later he sent me a blurb he wrote himself. I know I badmouth elite universities a lot but theyre still pretty good at selecting smart people who have the ability and patience to read. Most of my friends from college readTroubled.
I sent J.D. and Usha a copy of
about a year before it was published. I figured J.D. would be too busy to read it (hed just become a senator) so I wrote a few blurbs for him and asked if he would approve one of them. He replied saying Usha read it first, and that he was nearly finished reading it. A few weeks later he sent me a blurb he wrote himself. I know I badmouth elite universities a lot but theyre still pretty good at selecting smart people who have the ability and patience to read. Most of my friends from college read
.
Which is not a common experience for authors. It is generally accepted none of your friends or family will actually read your book, and not to take it personally. Courtney Maum has written that Id assumed that if I ever finished a book, there would be so much demand from family and friends...But I am here to tell you: most people in your family will never buy your book. Most of your friends wont either.
This made sense to me, and so I was prepared. A few people close to me, though, have unexpectedly told me they readTroubled. Still, a good idea never to ask. The majority of friends and family readTroubled, and the majority of people who provided blurbs also read it beforehand. This was atypical.
This made sense to me, and so I was prepared. A few people close to me, though, have unexpectedly told me they read
. Still, a good idea never to ask. The majority of friends and family read
, and the majority of people who provided blurbs also read it beforehand. This was atypical.
Returning to the topic of ghostwriting, eventweetsare ghostwritten60% ofbig accountsuse a ghostwriter at least some of the time. There was a scene inSuccessionwhere Kendall Roy suggests hiring a kid from the Harvard Lampoon to run Kendalls social media accounts. A lot of public figures do something like this. For what its worth, Ive never used a ghostwriter or AI to write any of my stuff and I never will.
Returning to the topic of ghostwriting, even
are ghostwritten60% of
use a ghostwriter at least some of the time. There was a scene in
where Kendall Roy suggests hiring a kid from the Harvard Lampoon to run Kendalls social media accounts. A lot of public figures do something like this. For what its worth, Ive never used a ghostwriter or AI to write any of my stuff and I never will.
Blurb gathering can also signal seriousness, especially from a first time author:
FromEsquire:
From
:
Sometimes I wonder if I hustled a little too hard in gathering blurbs. But I did notice an increase in the investment of effort from my publisher once they saw the list of endorsements I'd produced. Hustle and hard work remains underrated. Lot of authors put out a book and passively wait for chances to promote it. In the lead up to publication, I was traveling, recording 3+ podcasts a day, editing excerpts and adaptations for different outlets, running this Substack, and trying to keep my Twitter/X account mildly interesting.
My guess is that as people become aware that more and more written content is either produced by a ghostwriter or by artificial intelligence, we will becomemorerather than less interested in blurbs and endorsements and testimonials from actual trusted human beings about whether a book is really worth reading.
My guess is that as people become aware that more and more written content is either produced by a ghostwriter or by artificial intelligence, we will become
rather than less interested in blurbs and endorsements and testimonials from actual trusted human beings about whether a book is really worth reading.
Heres an analogy Ive borrowed from Rory Sutherland. One of the most common ways companies hire is through employee referrals. This seems to be how most entry-level jobs at mid-sized firms get filled. A personal recommendation from a current employee is a decent way to avoid hiring a total disaster. Sure, people like doing favors for their friends, but no ones going to risk their own reputation by vouching for a drunk, a thief, or a pyromaniac. Referrals arent perfect, and theyre not scientific, but they rarely end in catastrophe. You can apply this logic to book blurbs from well-known authors and public figures. Blurbs dont tell you which books are amazing, but they do help you to identify books that are, at the very least, not horrible.
Generally, if someone is willing to put their credibility on the line, that doesnt mean the book is amazing. But you can be reasonably sure the book isnt going to be terrible. And if a human being says something nice about another human beings work, you can have some reasonable amount of confidence that the work was not produced by a machine.
AI isnt going to ever fully replace human artists or writers or storytellers. If you learned a movie was written by AI and the characters were all digital representations of real-life, you would find it less interesting and less satisfying. If you learned an audiobook was read not by the author, but by some computerized AI process designed to sound like the author, you wouldnt enjoy it as much. Even if the two versions were objectively indistinguishable.
People have deep interest in human artists. Their history, their motives, how and why the art was created. People believe and hope they're getting a glimpse into the artist's soul. AI can't replace that.
A human lifting a thousand pounds will always be more impressive than a machine doing the same. People are drawn to things that seem hard to do and appreciate creations that clearly require effort, creativity, and skill.
This is something a lot of nerds who are obsessed with optimization dont understand. Aesthetic pleasure is deeper than a function of simply ingesting information (input) and producing something from it (output). Many nerds in the AI space believe a creative product is not special. Its just a calculation. Computers can do it just as well (or, in their minds, better) because silicon is superior to our fleshy, inefficient biological systems. To them, the creative process is just another predictable system that needs to be optimized.
But the enjoyment we get from something derives not from the thing itself but from what we think that thing is and its history and connection with a human being. How you feel about a meal will differ if you know it was prepared by a human chef versus a robot. How you feel about a book will differ depending on whether it was written by a human or AI. Same for AI-generated art versus human-made art.
This is why we prefer originals to forgeries or AI-generated art. This is why a team of specialists recently spent $30K to hire chemists, curators, and patent lawyers to determine whether a painting is an authentic Van Gogh or not. If it is, then the painting is worth $15 million.
By definition, there can only be one original. This naturally carries a certain prestige. Particularly for those who own it, but also for those who see it up close. An original work has been directly created by the artist. It embodies a unique history born from a creative process. It naturally attracts more interest than the mere technical skill of a forger or the algorithmic precision of AI-generated art. Our desire for authentic human creativity and artistic intent is why our preference for human-made isnt going away.
I tend to find authors themselves more interesting than the characters they write about, and their careers more instructive than the imaginary worlds by which they reveal or cloak themselves. Reading emails from readers ofTroubled, I'm learning I'm not alone in this. Maybe at some point I'll write a newsletter post "What happens after you write a semi-successful memoir."
I tend to find authors themselves more interesting than the characters they write about, and their careers more instructive than the imaginary worlds by which they reveal or cloak themselves. Reading emails from readers of
, I'm learning I'm not alone in this. Maybe at some point I'll write a newsletter post "What happens after you write a semi-successful memoir."
People sometimes ask me if I learned anything new about myself in the process of writing my book. One lesson: authoring my past reconfirmed that I was also the author of my present, and the author of my future. WritingTroubled, I could locate the specific moments when I was under the sway of others  the foster system, caretakers, peers, etc. and when I finally took control of my own life. Taking responsibility for myself was the first step in redirecting my life trajectory.
People sometimes ask me if I learned anything new about myself in the process of writing my book. One lesson: authoring my past reconfirmed that I was also the author of my present, and the author of my future. Writing
, I could locate the specific moments when I was under the sway of others  the foster system, caretakers, peers, etc. and when I finally took control of my own life. Taking responsibility for myself was the first step in redirecting my life trajectory.
Comments
Restacks
SLGeorge
SLGeorge
Feb 16
I think this is one of the best Rob Henderson articles. It's just fascinating.
I think this is one of the best Rob Henderson articles. It's just fascinating.
The following are specifically powerful statements in the article:
The following are specifically powerful statements in the article:
"People have deep interest in human artists. Their history, their motives, how and why the art was created. People believe and hope they're getting a glimpse into the artist's soul. AI can't replace that."
"People have deep interest in human artists. Their history, their motives, how and why the art was created. People believe and hope they're getting a glimpse into the artist's soul. AI can't replace that."
"A human lifting a thousand pounds will always be more impressive than a machine doing the same."
"A human lifting a thousand pounds will always be more impressive than a machine doing the same."
"Aesthetic pleasure is deeper than a function of simply ingesting information (input) and producing something from it (output)."
"Aesthetic pleasure is deeper than a function of simply ingesting information (input) and producing something from it (output)."
"the enjoyment we get from something derives not from the thing itself but from what we think that thing is and its history and connection with a human being."
"the enjoyment we get from something derives not from the thing itself but from what we think that thing is and its history and connection with a human being."
Rob tends to write about things that other writers don't and that makes him unique and truly interesting.
Rob tends to write about things that other writers don't and that makes him unique and truly interesting.
Like (6)
Reply
Share
Frank Lee
Frank Lee
The Social Misfit Newsletter
The Social Misfit Newsletter
The Social Misfit Newsletter
Feb 16
I have a good friend that is a successful NYT best-selling author of novels.  He is constantly asked to write blurbs for other writers.  He will only do so honestly after reads the book.  However, he tells me that many people get payola for their blurbs just like influencers.  He says it is a racket.
I have a good friend that is a successful NYT best-selling author of novels.  He is constantly asked to write blurbs for other writers.  He will only do so honestly after reads the book.  However, he tells me that many people get payola for their blurbs just like influencers.  He says it is a racket.
I tend to have a few trusted book source recommendations, and I also check the reviews online.  I listen to podcasts, etc., and often the guess is invited because the host read the book and found it notable... and so I put it on my Kindle.  Unfortunately I have a queue of about 40-50 books waiting to be read and my biggest problem is finding the time with so much good content available.
I tend to have a few trusted book source recommendations, and I also check the reviews online.  I listen to podcasts, etc., and often the guess is invited because the host read the book and found it notable... and so I put it on my Kindle.  Unfortunately I have a queue of about 40-50 books waiting to be read and my biggest problem is finding the time with so much good content available.
Like (3)
Reply
Share
Top
Latest
Discussions

Rob Henderson

Rob Henderson

Rob Henderson

Rob Henderson

Rob Henderson

Rob Henderson

Rob Henderson

Rob Henderson

Rob Henderson

Rob Henderson


undefined subscriptions will be displayed on your profile (edit)
Skip for now
For your security, we need to re-authenticate you.
Click the link we sent to sasha.p.podolsky@gmail.com, orclick here to sign in.