

1
Book meeting
Book a meeting
Subscribed
Share
Share
Give a gift subscription
Give a gift subscription
Ive been listening to lectures for acoursetitled Understanding Human Emotions by Dr. Lawrence Ian Reed, a Clinical Professor of Psychology at New York University.
Ive been listening to lectures for a
titled Understanding Human Emotions by Dr. Lawrence Ian Reed, a Clinical Professor of Psychology at New York University.
Here are my notes onlecture 1,lecture 2,lectures 3 and 4, andlectures 5 and 6. I remember learning a lot of this stuff in college and in my doctoral program. A useful refresher for me. A good overview for anyone with an interest in the psychology of emotions.
Here are my notes on
,
,
, and
. I remember learning a lot of this stuff in college and in my doctoral program. A useful refresher for me. A good overview for anyone with an interest in the psychology of emotions.
Below are my highlights, notes and reactions to lectures 7-9.
[In square brackets are thoughts/notes I jotted while listening]:
As children age, their emotional functioning develops and matures
Take crying as an example. An infants crying is impossible to ignore, and everyone around frantically tries to find out what the baby needs. When a 6-year-old cries, he can describe the reasons why he is upset, and possibly manipulate those around them, to get his needs or desires met
Crying is the first emotional expression humans exhibit
Disgust also shows up early, with infants exhibiting the expression of disgust in response to, for example, sour tastes
The early appearance of disgust makes sense from an evolutionary perspective, as the disgust response protects infants from potentially life-threatening pathogens
Babies begin to smile at around 2 months of age; though some babies will smile in their sleep as early as 1 month old. Still, these are not social smiles, as these sleeping, smiling babies are not responding to others around them
Contrary to popular views, infants emotional expressions shape their parents responses more so than parents emotional expressions shape their infants responses
Somewhere between the ages of 4 and 12 months, babies develop the ability to clearly exhibit anger
Expressions of anger indicate that babies at this age (4 to 12 months) have some understanding that they have a goal, and that their goal is being blocked, which is what typically elicits anger in both children and adults
At around 18 months, children develop the capacity for self-conscious emotions, including embarrassment and envy, as well as empathy and sympathy for others
Heres a nice video covering some of the studies done at the lab where I worked at as a research assistant at Yale:
In the second year of life, children develop some sense of self-awareness and consciousness, an awareness of the self as it might be seen by other people. This ability is a requirement for the capacity to experience self-conscious emotions, such as embarrassment
In the second year of life, children also develop the ability to mentalize, or understand that others have subjective feelings and perspectives that might differ from their own
At around 2 years of age, children begin exhibiting signs of the ability to experience guilt and shame
At this age, children will avert their gaze and show bodily tension when they break a social partners toy. Children from age 2 onward will also try to make amends if they break a social partners toy, indicating feelings of guilt
How about the ability to recognize emotions in others? When does this ability emerge?
The ability to recognize emotions comes at roughly the same time children develop the ability to express emotions
Children begin showing fearful expressions at roughly 4 months old, which is also when they begin to recognize fear in others
In visual cliff studies, infants are placed on a platform and invited to crawl across it. The middle of the platform is a strong pane of see-through glass, which can evoke fear as the infant can see the floor underneath them. In this experiment, 74 percent of children crawled across the pane of glass when they could see that their mothers looked happy. In contrast,noneof the infants crossed the glass when their mothers looked fearful
In visual cliff studies, infants are placed on a platform and invited to crawl across it. The middle of the platform is a strong pane of see-through glass, which can evoke fear as the infant can see the floor underneath them. In this experiment, 74 percent of children crawled across the pane of glass when they could see that their mothers looked happy. In contrast,
of the infants crossed the glass when their mothers looked fearful
By age 5, children are good at recognizing and labeling the emotions of others
It takes some time and development for children to recognize information from facial expressions
From the moment we are born, in contrast, we are able to process information from our caregivers vocal expressions
Electroencephalogram (EEG) studies indicate that newborns between 1 and 5 days old are able to differentiate between angry, happy, fearful and neutral voices
Even when newborns are sleeping, they show the ability to distinguish between different vocal emotional expressions. EEG studies show that a sleeping babys brain activity changes when they hear angry vs. fearful voices
Babies experience different brain activity when they hear another infant laughing vs. crying
Babies with autism do not show these different neural signatures in response to vocal expressions, indicating that even at a very young age autism interferes with the ability to recognize and distinguish between different emotions in others
Professor Reed then transitions into discussing the relationship between emotion and cognition
Cognition and emotion have a complicated history. Traditionally, and perhaps intuitively, thoughts, reason, and rationality (cognition) seem to stand at odds with passions, feelings, and emotion
The view that emotions are dumb, pointless, primitive, or reckless is a staple of western thought, dating back from the Stoics to Descartes and Spinoza. Many thinkers have viewed emotions as unruly passions that should be reined in by reason and morality
You can see a similar approach in Freudian thought, as Freud contrasted the id (the source of passion, instinct, unruly emotions) with the ego (which attempts to channel the roiling cauldron of the id into more socially acceptable expressions)
Behavioral economics and some strands of psychology view emotions along the same lines, as sources of biases and error that oppose rationality
However, emotions are not superfluous or stupid
Emotions evolved because they enhanced the ability of our ancestors to survive and reproduce. Emotions are essential survival tools that helped our ancestors survive rugged terrain, potentially deadly pathogens, scarce resources, and ever-shifting social dynamics and political intrigues
Some benefits of emotions:
Fear protects us from predators
Disgust protects us from pathogens
Anger prepares us tobargain for better treatmentand avoid exploitation
Anger prepares us to
and avoid exploitation
From a scientists perspective, a persons emotions are orderly, purposeful, and intelligent. The specific emotion we feel and the intensity with which we feel it tend to fit closely to the situations we are in
To survive in the ancestral environment, emotions had to be smart, precise, and efficient in pursuit of goals, even if their goals seem to differ from our own
Viewed from this evolutionary perspective, emotions are rational
Emotions are designed to help us make good tradeoffs between costs and benefits
For instance, the emotion of fear weighs the cost posed by a potential source of danger versus the benefits of ignoring it. Interestingly, we tend to feel less fear in response to a source of potential danger when the benefits of confronting it outweigh the costs of fleeing
For example, a person who is hungry feels less fear when hunting dangerous animals such as elk
Similarly, the emotion of disgust weighs the risk of exposure to pathogens against the benefits of eating potentially questionable food, engaging in intimacy, or caring for a sick loved one
[People tend to experience less disgust when interacting with a loved one who is clearly unwell with illness or infection, and the evolutionary logic at work here is that the benefits of caring for your friend or family member outweigh the potential risk of exposure to their illness or infection. In contrast, we feel much more disgust when we see an unfamiliar stranger with the same illness, because there is little to no benefit from being exposed to the person.]
[The benefit to caring for the sick loved one is that if the person is a family member, you are helping your own genetic kin to survive. If the person is a close friend, then this person might reciprocate and help you later down the line when they are healthy and you become sick. Of course, we dont actually think this out in such explicit terms. Our emotions do the work for us, and we dont have to engage in much deliberate thought in order for our emotions to help us make good decisions about tradeoffs.]
We feel less disgust about drinking putrid water when we are dehydrated. When you are on the verge of dying of thirst, then we implicitly determine that the possibility of survival by drinking dirty water outweighs the dangers of possibly ingesting pathogens
We feel less disgust at the saliva of an attractive romantic partner
[Sexual disgust is generally suppressed when we are with a romantic partner we find attractive and whom we love]
Interestingly, we dont usually know the underlying evolutionary purpose of our emotions. For instance, before science discovered the existence of micro-organisms, no one could have known that the feeling of disgust is to protect us from ingesting pathogens. Festering wounds, rotten meat, open sores, excrement, etc. all contain pathogens and humans have been disgusted by them even though, prior to modern science, they didnt exactly know why
This is probably where the view that emotions are irrational comes from. We are in the dark about their purpose and how they help us, yet we are still under their sway. Emotions exert a lot of influence over us, and often we feel that they are unpleasant or block us from our goals, even though they may in fact be helping us in some way
This creates the feeling that our conscious, rational mind has been hijacked by a powerful external force (our emotions) that we dont understand. Professor Reed suggests that this might be why, in the era before modern science, people often believed they or others were possessed by demons or other supernatural entities. Emotions can be sudden and overpowering, giving rise to paranormal explanations about the effects they have over us
One challenge complex organisms in complex environments face is that we have to accomplish our goals in an ever-shifting environment with imperfect information
Human emotions, averaged over the course of evolutionary history, tended to benefit our ancestors Darwinian goals of survival and reproduction
Emotions help to direct our actions in situations with limited information
In economic games in the laboratory with money at stake, people tend to be more generous to individuals who exhibit angry facial expressions
Anger, if credibly communicated, can influence the behavior of those around us to value our interests more highly
In studies where real money is at stake in prisoners dilemma-style economic games, researchers find that participants who smile when they make promises are more likely to cooperate rather than defect
Relatedly, smiles increase the credibility of promises. In other words, if you smile when you make a promise, people are more likely to believe you
Economics and evolutionary psychology are similar in that both deal with costs, benefits, goals, tradeoffs, and strategies
[The payoff in economics is money; the payoff in evolution is survival and reproduction]
Reed describes the five moral foundations as proposed by Jonathan Haidt and his co-authors:
Care/harm: Motivated by feelings of compassion, care, and empathy, this domain leads people to feel that actions displaying cruelty or disregard for others are wrong.
Fairness/cheating: Guided by the feeling of resentment people experience when someone benefits from a greater share of resources than other members of the group, this domain leads people to condemn those who take more than what the observer believes they deserve.
Loyalty/betrayal: Driven by feelings of community and belonging, this domain produces a sense of shared responsibility to the community, and condemnation of those who betray the core values of the group.
Authority/subversion: Expressed by feelings of respect for order and stability, this foundation instills a negative evaluation of behaviours aimed at denying the hierarchical structure that is considered legitimate by the group.
Purity/degradation: Based on feelings that ones body has immaterial and sacred value, the activation of this domain leads people to react with disgust from things they consider contaminated, unnatural or degrading.
[These domains of human moral psychology evolved to overcome recurrent adaptive threats in the ancestral environment. That is, selective pressures favored the emergence of quick intuitions and emotions sensitive to a wide range of moral foundations that arose to solve challenging dilemmas.
These intuitions about what is morally right or wrong rest upon a set of universal content domains. Moral Foundations Theory is a diverse account of morality, defined within the moral foundationsframeworkas interlocking sets of values, practices, institutions, and evolved psychological mechanisms that work together to suppress or regulate selfishness and make social life possible. Human moral intuitions derive from evolved psychological mechanisms.
These intuitions about what is morally right or wrong rest upon a set of universal content domains. Moral Foundations Theory is a diverse account of morality, defined within the moral foundations
as interlocking sets of values, practices, institutions, and evolved psychological mechanisms that work together to suppress or regulate selfishness and make social life possible. Human moral intuitions derive from evolved psychological mechanisms.
People have a propensity to react intuitively and emotionally to various situations perceived as relevant to these moral domains. However, the prominence and specific manifestations of each moral domain are shaped by cultural factors, life events, and the relational context in which we find ourselves. While each moral foundation has existed throughout human history and is present across human cultures, the expression of each particular domain will vary depending on the local context.]

To receive new posts, access more than100 premium archived posts, and support my work, consider becoming a paid subscriber.
Subscribed


Comments
Restacks
Arif
Arif
Arif
Arif
Arif
Nov 27
This is great timing, I just finished reading Paul Blooms book Just Babies: The origins of good and evil and he discusses a lot of what is described here and the morality of babies.
This is great timing, I just finished reading Paul Blooms book Just Babies: The origins of good and evil and he discusses a lot of what is described here and the morality of babies.
Like (2)
Reply
Share
Its Just Me Dad
Its Just Me Dad
Nov 27
Economics and evolutionary psychology are similar in that both deal with costs, benefits, goals, and strategies.
Economics and evolutionary psychology are similar in that both deal with costs, benefits, goals, and strategies.
Fascinating parallel. Intellectually I have been drawn to both economics and evolutionary psychology.
Fascinating parallel. Intellectually I have been drawn to both economics and evolutionary psychology.
Bravoexcellent notes.
Bravoexcellent notes.
Like (1)
Reply
Share
Top
Latest
Discussions

Rob Henderson

Rob Henderson

Rob Henderson

Rob Henderson

Rob Henderson

Rob Henderson

Rob Henderson

Rob Henderson

Rob Henderson

Rob Henderson


undefined subscriptions will be displayed on your profile (edit)
Skip for now
For your security, we need to re-authenticate you.
Click the link we sent to sasha.p.podolsky@gmail.com, orclick here to sign in.
Info
Shopping








0:00/5:13

0:00
/
5:13


