

1
Book meeting
Book a meeting
Ive been listening to lectures for acoursetitled Understanding Human Emotions by Lawrence Ian Reed, a Clinical Professor of Psychology at New York University.
Ive been listening to lectures for a
titled Understanding Human Emotions by Lawrence Ian Reed, a Clinical Professor of Psychology at New York University.
Below are my highlights, notes and reactions to lecture 1.
[In square brackets are thoughts/notes I jotted while listening]:
There are limits to how well we can voluntarily control our facial expressions.
Most people can feign a facial expression in the absence of any underlying emotion well enough to fool most people. However, it is difficult to prevent a facial expression from occurring when we experience a particular emotion.
Why do we express emotions on our faces at all?
What is the purpose of advertising something as private and personal as our own emotions on the most conspicuous parts of ourselvesour faces?
The benefit to the observer of your emotion is clear: They get to see your internal state and how youre likely to behave
But based on the principles of evolution and signaling theory, there must also be a benefit to you, the expresser of the emotion.
These questions ultimately led the instructor, Dr. Lawrence Ian Reed, to study the psychology of the emotions
One aim of the course is to get you to better understand not only your own emotions, but the emotions of those around you.
Reed asks a simple question: What is an emotion?
Humans have a tacit understanding of emotions, even if weve never been explicitly told what they are. This is similar to concepts like beauty or justice. We intuitively know these ideas, but struggle to provide a definition in clear language.
[The psychologists Daniel Nettle and Melissa Bateson havedefinedemotions as suites of cognitive, motivational, and physiological changes that are triggered by appraisal of specific classes of environmental situations.]
[The psychologists Daniel Nettle and Melissa Bateson have
emotions as suites of cognitive, motivational, and physiological changes that are triggered by appraisal of specific classes of environmental situations.]
The most influential early ideas about emotions came from the people youd expectCharles Darwin, William James (often called the founder of American psychology) and Sigmund Freud.
In 1872, Darwin wrote a book calledThe Expression of the Emotions in Man and Animals, considered at the time to be the most important book on emotions ever written
In 1872, Darwin wrote a book called
, considered at the time to be the most important book on emotions ever written
Prior to this, it was widely believed that God had given people facial muscles that allowed them to express uniquely human emotions
Darwin argued that emotional expressions came from habits that were useful in our evolutionary past and are now present as vestiges of that past. For him, emotions were akin to something like the appendix; useful in the past but less so today.
For example, when we get goosebumps, we express something that was useful in our evolutionary past, when goosebumps would cause our hair to stand up and make us look more formidable when we experienced fear.
Another example is sneering, which Darwin proposed was a vestige of snarling, preparing to bite an adversary.
[Today, emotion research demonstrates that our emotional facial expressions are useful. The wide-eyed look that coincides with fear enhances peripheral vision, enhancing our ability to spot potential threats. The upturned lip and wrinkled nose when we feel disgust helps to block pathogens from entering our bodies.]
In his 1890 bookThe Principles of Psychology, William James focused on how emotions activate bodily movement.
In his 1890 book
, William James focused on how emotions activate bodily movement.
One way of understanding emotions is that they motivate action. For example, you see a bear, then you feel fear and then feel motivated to move away from the bear.
But James proposed that when we see the bear, we want to move away, and then recognize the physiological changes in our body as fear. When you feel fear, you recognize changes in your heart rate, temperature, and posture. For James,thisphysical change is what an emotion is.
But James proposed that when we see the bear, we want to move away, and then recognize the physiological changes in our body as fear. When you feel fear, you recognize changes in your heart rate, temperature, and posture. For James,
physical change is what an emotion is.
William James shaped emotion research by pointing out that there are physiological changes in the body that accompany emotions, which are still studied to this day. He also stated that emotions give color to life, saying that they lead us to view the world through rose-colored glasses or give us a jaundiced view of the world. Following this, emotion researchers study how emotions change peoples perceptions of themselves and events around them.
Later, in the 1960s, the Schachter-Singer theory of emotion, also known as the two-factor theory, proposed that emotions are a combination of physiological arousal and our interpretations of these feelings based on our environment. Your body feels a certain way, and you infer your emotion based on cues from your local environment.
[Imagine you just finished riding a roller coaster and then immediately had the last 3 hours of your memory wiped clean (Im assuming you were waiting in line for Space Mountain). Then you are told you just won the lottery. You might attribute your increased heart rate and blood pressure to your discovery that you are now a multimillionaire.]
More recent work suggests that this isnt the full picture of how emotions work. There are indeed specific physiological patterns to specific individual emotions. For example, we blush when were embarrassed, and not when were happy or sad.
Some of Sigmund Freuds ideas have stood the test of time. One is that early difficulties in childhood can be so influential that they leave imprints that are apparent throughout the lifespan.
One of Freuds core enduring insights: A persons emotional life in adulthood is strongly influenced by his or her relationships as a child.
Darwin, James and Freud laid important foundations for later empirical research in emotion.
Reed then goes on to discuss even earlier influential figures from literature and philosophy.
Aristotle proposed that emotions depended on what we believe. He believed that anger occurs because of our belief that a slight against us has occurred.
Imagine someone accidentally steps on your foot, and you feel a moderate amount of pain. You understand its an accident, and are unlikely to become angry. Now imagine someone walks up to you, raises their foot, and steps on your foot, causing you to feel a moderate amount of pain. In this second case, Aristotle wrote that you would be more likely to become angry because you attribute it to a slight against you.
[Aristotle was on the right track. The latest research suggests that anger evolved to bargain for better treatment. I wrote more about thishere.]
[Aristotle was on the right track. The latest research suggests that anger evolved to bargain for better treatment. I wrote more about this
.]
In the first half of the twentieth century, the behaviorist school of psychology grew in prominence. Behaviorism arose in reaction to psychoanalysis, which probed the inner contents of the mind and proposed ideas that were difficult to quantify and often impossible to disprove.
B.F. Skinner, perhaps the most prominent behaviorist, wrote We all know that emotions are useless, and are bad for our peace of mind and blood pressure.
Skinner believed that anything that was not observable and measurable had no place in the study of psychology.
This has changed, and there has been a lot of progress in the study of emotions.
Today, emotion researchers generally believe emotions arise based on how we appraise events in our environment.
[This is consistent with the affect-as-information hypothesis, whichsuggeststhat the function of emotions is to alert individuals to changes in their environment. And to respond appropriately. Emotions signal the presence of events that may have important implications for survival and/or reproduction.]
[This is consistent with the affect-as-information hypothesis, which
that the function of emotions is to alert individuals to changes in their environment. And to respond appropriately. Emotions signal the presence of events that may have important implications for survival and/or reproduction.]
[Positive emotions arose to direct organisms toward goals that, on average, increase the likelihood of survival and reproduction. Positive emotions did not evolve just because they happen to feel good. Good feelings evolved to motivate certain behaviors that typically had some adaptive benefit in the ancestral environment. Negative emotions evolved to direct organisms away from potential threats, or to repair existing relationships with allies, or motivate changes in behavior that led to fitness-damaging outcomes to avoid such behavior in the future.]
How do emotions differ from other feelings states like moods or dispositions?
Emotions describe states that last for a limited amount of time. Seconds or perhaps minutes. Facial expressions last for a few seconds. Bodily expressions typically last for seconds or minutes. Moreover, its rare that we dont know the causes of our emotions.
This is in contrast to moods, which can last for hours, days, weeks, or even lifetimes. Examples include depression (or low mood), anxiety, and mania.
Unlike with our emotions, we arent always aware of the source of our moods, or what causes changes in our moods.
This lecture was a summary of the foundations of thought that led to modern psychological research on human emotions.
I remember learning a lot of this stuff in undergrad and grad school. This is a good refresher for me. A good overview for anyone with an interest in the psychology of emotions.
Ill continue with the series and share notes on lecture 2 soon.
My book comes out in less than 4 weeks. Preorders can make or break a book, so (if you can), please preorder your copy:
Amazon (US)
Amazon (UK)
Audible(I narrated the audiobook myself)
(I narrated the audiobook myself)
Other book vendors
A nice shoutout from Harvard psychology professor Steven Pinker:

Comments
Restacks
COMRADITY
COMRADITY
COMRADITY
COMRADITY
COMRADITY
Jan 26, 2024
As I read this I thought about the role facial expressions play in face to face communications. Encouraging or discouraging the direction of what the observer says - or - even interrupting the speaker altogether.  It is missing in most conversations that happen today, because they are on the phone or digital - as in texting or social media.
As I read this I thought about the role facial expressions play in face to face communications. Encouraging or discouraging the direction of what the observer says - or - even interrupting the speaker altogether.  It is missing in most conversations that happen today, because they are on the phone or digital - as in texting or social media.
Like (3)
Reply
Share
Scott Gibb
Scott Gibb
Trim to Truth
Trim to Truth
Trim to Truth
Jan 26, 2024
Rob - If you were to ask me what emotions are or what word first comes to your mind in describing emotions I would respond with emergence or emergent phenomena of the mind that form thoughts, ideas and language.
Rob - If you were to ask me what emotions are or what word first comes to your mind in describing emotions I would respond with emergence or emergent phenomena of the mind that form thoughts, ideas and language.
Im a bit surprised that the word emergence is not mentioned in your summary because to me that is the central feature of emotions.
Im a bit surprised that the word emergence is not mentioned in your summary because to me that is the central feature of emotions.
Like (1)
Reply
Share
Top
Latest
Discussions

Rob Henderson

Rob Henderson

Rob Henderson

Rob Henderson

Rob Henderson

Rob Henderson

Rob Henderson

Rob Henderson

Rob Henderson

Rob Henderson


undefined subscriptions will be displayed on your profile (edit)
Skip for now
For your security, we need to re-authenticate you.
Click the link we sent to sasha.p.podolsky@gmail.com, orclick here to sign in.