

1
Book meeting
Book a meeting
You can now watch or listen to my second conversation with Jordan Peterson on his podcast. A deep dive into the power of stories, the Dark Tetrad personality traits, evolutionary mating strategies, fragmented families, and much more:
Links forSpotifyandApple Podcast.
Links for
and
.
Some of interesting tidbits from our conversation:
Victim signaling,definedas 'public and intentional expressions of ones disadvantages, suffering, oppression, or personal limitations' is strongly correlated (r = .52) with Dark Triad personality traits
Victim signaling,
as 'public and intentional expressions of ones disadvantages, suffering, oppression, or personal limitations' is strongly correlated (r = .52) with Dark Triad personality traits
The bestpredictorof politically correct authoritarianism is low verbal intelligence (r = -.51)
The best
of politically correct authoritarianism is low verbal intelligence (r = -.51)
Those are bothmassivestatistical relationships in psychological research. For context, the correlation between height and weight is typically around r = .6, the correlation between married spouses education level is about r = .5, and the correlation between intelligence and income is r = .3
Those are both
statistical relationships in psychological research. For context, the correlation between height and weight is typically around r = .6, the correlation between married spouses education level is about r = .5, and the correlation between intelligence and income is r = .3
People who have high levels of wealth and status also express the strongest desire for wealth and status. People who report the highest levels of earnings, education, and occupational prestige are also the most likely to agree with statements such as It would please me to be in a position of power over others
I didnt mention this in the discussion, but this is arguably an indicator of a relatively fair societythe people who most strongly crave status are also the most likely to attain it. Related posthere
I didnt mention this in the discussion, but this is arguably an indicator of a relatively fair societythe people who most strongly crave status are also the most likely to attain it. Related post
Although many people claim that their sexuality is fundamental to who they are, very few people will say that their actual sexual past is fundamental to who they are
Elite university graduates are perfectly open and often eager to publicly speak about their race, gender, and sexual orientation. However, there is one marginalized identity they often conceal: coming from a low socioeconomic status background. Elite graduates hide being poor, and interestingly they also hide being rich (they hide economic capital but still display cultural capital in the form of arcane knowledge, conversations about traveling in exotic locales, and luxury beliefs). Despite all the rhetoric around equity in elite universities and firms, the marginalized attribute that is arguably the most difficultgrowing up in povertyis the one people dont feel comfortable disclosing. Dont expect this to change any time soon
Theres an inverse relationship between age and Dark Triad personality traits; relative to older adults, young adultsscore higheron narcissism, psychopathy, and Machiavellianism
Theres an inverse relationship between age and Dark Triad personality traits; relative to older adults, young adults
on narcissism, psychopathy, and Machiavellianism
My discovery that Im half Hispanic on my fathers side. I went to bed white adjacent and woke up an underrepresented minority.
The archetypal pathological mother is overbearing, overinvolved, and overprotective. In contrast, the archetypal pathological father is simply absent. Not tyrannical. Not abusive. Not violent. Just not there
Jordan says something that increases my confidence that stories and narratives played an important role in my life trajectory
Theres much morewe went more than two hoursin total. Hope you enjoy.
Theres much morewe went more than two hours
. Hope you enjoy.
You can read myNew York Timesop-ed about Jordan Petersonhere(ungatedhere)
You can read my
op-ed about Jordan Peterson
(ungated
)
My previous conversation with Jordan Peterson back in 2021here
My previous conversation with Jordan Peterson back in 2021
Here are a few new reviews and discussions of my book:
Skewering luxury beliefs, with a past informed by foster-care chaosby George F. Will(ungatedhere)
by George F. Will(ungated
)
"Henderson says, 'We now live in a culture where affluent, educated, and well-connected people validate and affirm the behaviors, decisions, and attitudes of marginalized and deprived kids that they would never accept for themselves or their own children.'"
Misery Loves Companyby Helen Dale
by Helen Dale
"The way Henderson shifts gear...producing a searing analysis of poverty, class, and the value of family while launching ordnance at people whove landed on 'Free Parking' in the Monopoly game of Lifeis astonishing."
Light from darkness: Rob Hendersons pitch-perfect concept of luxury beliefsby Patrick Nash
by Patrick Nash
"Bleak as his start in life was, however, Henderson has mercifully not penned a misery-memoir. On the contrary, Troubled is a serious piece of scholarship told through a redemptive but unsentimental autobiographical arc."
A conversation with Rob Henderson on his bestselling book, and how elites dont practice what they preachby Hanna Seariac
by Hanna Seariac
Even if having an intact, stable, loving home with two married parents has zero impact on college graduation rates and the likelihood of future incarceration and so on, we should still promote loving, stable, secure families for kids, because the emotional pain of a child is still important, regardless of their future."
Troubled: A Memoir of Foster Care, Family and Social Classby Thomas Foydel
by Thomas Foydel
And areminderto please leave your reviews on Amazon and Goodreads
And a
to please leave your reviews on Amazon and Goodreads
You can order your copy ofTroubled(now a National Bestseller!):
You can order your copy of
(now a National Bestseller!):
Amazon (US)
Barnes & Noble
Bookshop
Amazon (UK)
Audible(I narrated the audiobook myself)
(I narrated the audiobook myself)
Other book vendors
Ive spent several months compiling a list of the most interesting and impactful books Ive ever read.
The list contains my mini-reviews summarizing each book and explaining its importance.
If you are interested in getting it, just follow these two steps:
1. Order a copy ofTroubled: A Memoir of Foster Care, Family, and Social Classin whatever format you want (print, ebook, or audiobook)
1. Order a copy of
in whatever format you want (print, ebook, or audiobook)
2. Send a screenshot or photo of your receipt or proof of purchase to the email address troubledmemoir@gmail.comand use the subject line SECRET READING LIST
Already purchased a copy? Just send a screenshot of your receipt to troubledmemoir@gmail.com with the subject line SECRET READING LIST and youll get the secret reading list right away.
That's it!
And if you dont receive it within 24 hours, please check your spam/junk.
Initially, the secret reading list was available only to those who pre-ordered. But so many people continue to request the list, that Im now offering it for anyone who has purchased a copy ofTroubled. Again, I also put a lot of work into the list, and hope more people find it valuable.
Initially, the secret reading list was available only to those who pre-ordered. But so many people continue to request the list, that Im now offering it for anyone who has purchased a copy of
. Again, I also put a lot of work into the list, and hope more people find it valuable.
Comments
Restacks
Scott Gibb
Scott Gibb
Trim to Truth
Trim to Truth
Trim to Truth
Mar 10, 2024
Its incredible that this boy who we know through your memoir, is now having two hour conversations with Jordan Peterson.  That should give us hope about America.
Its incredible that this boy who we know through your memoir, is now having two hour conversations with Jordan Peterson.  That should give us hope about America.
Like (14)
Reply
Share
A. N. Owen
A. N. Owen
Quest for Justice
Quest for Justice
Quest for Justice
Mar 10, 2024
"Jordan says something that increases my confidence that stories and narratives played an important role in my life trajectory."
"Jordan says something that increases my confidence that stories and narratives played an important role in my life trajectory."
I've long observed how people seem to conform themselves to their preferred narrative arcs. This is particularly obvious among certain types of young women.
I've long observed how people seem to conform themselves to their preferred narrative arcs. This is particularly obvious among certain types of young women.
Like (6)
Reply
Share
Top
Latest
Discussions

Rob Henderson

Rob Henderson

Rob Henderson

Rob Henderson

Rob Henderson

Rob Henderson

Rob Henderson

Rob Henderson

Rob Henderson

Rob Henderson


undefined subscriptions will be displayed on your profile (edit)
Skip for now
For your security, we need to re-authenticate you.
Click the link we sent to sasha.p.podolsky@gmail.com, orclick here to sign in.
Info
Shopping








0:00/1:48:22

0:00
/
1:48:22


