

1
Book meeting
Book a meeting
Subscribed
Share
Share
Give a gift subscription
Give a gift subscription
Below is a transcript, lightly edited, with some highlights frommy conversationwith the rapper and podcaster Zuby. We spoke about fame, the hero's journey, how to develop confidence, modern dating, and much more.
Below is a transcript, lightly edited, with some highlights from
with the rapper and podcaster Zuby. We spoke about fame, the hero's journey, how to develop confidence, modern dating, and much more.
Zuby:Welcome back to the Real Talk with Zuby podcast. On today's episode, we've got another brilliant guest. This is Rob Henderson. He is a writer and psychologist with lots of interesting insights about the human condition. So, welcome to the show, Rob. How are you doing?
Welcome back to the Real Talk with Zuby podcast. On today's episode, we've got another brilliant guest. This is Rob Henderson. He is a writer and psychologist with lots of interesting insights about the human condition. So, welcome to the show, Rob. How are you doing?
Rob Henderson:Hey, Zuby. Thank you. Yeah, good. Really great to be here.
Hey, Zuby. Thank you. Yeah, good. Really great to be here.
Zuby:No doubt, man. I've done a brief intro there, Rob, but for those who are not familiar, please introduce yourself.
No doubt, man. I've done a brief intro there, Rob, but for those who are not familiar, please introduce yourself.
Rob Henderson:I have a PhD in psychology from the University of Cambridge. I studied psychology at Yale as an undergrad. I have a book coming out calledTroubled: A Memoir of Foster Care, Family, and Social Class. I had an unusual, indirect path to higher education. Grew up in foster homes in Los Angeles, never knew my father, fled that environment as soon as I could. Enlisted in the Air Force when I was 17. Did a couple of tours, deployed, traveled the world, and eventually landed at Yale. Studied there on the GI Bill, and that was in 2015. In the book, I talk about how I witnessed the birth of what people now refer to as wokeness. This term hadn't quite caught on back in 2015; it was still in the embryonic stage, but I was seeing the early stages of cancel culture. I document that at length in the final third of my book. Despite having a PhD, I haven't pursued a traditional academic path and didn't become a professor. Now, I'm mostly known for my writing on Substack, Twitter, and creating an alternate path for myself as a writer.
I have a PhD in psychology from the University of Cambridge. I studied psychology at Yale as an undergrad. I have a book coming out called
. I had an unusual, indirect path to higher education. Grew up in foster homes in Los Angeles, never knew my father, fled that environment as soon as I could. Enlisted in the Air Force when I was 17. Did a couple of tours, deployed, traveled the world, and eventually landed at Yale. Studied there on the GI Bill, and that was in 2015. In the book, I talk about how I witnessed the birth of what people now refer to as wokeness. This term hadn't quite caught on back in 2015; it was still in the embryonic stage, but I was seeing the early stages of cancel culture. I document that at length in the final third of my book. Despite having a PhD, I haven't pursued a traditional academic path and didn't become a professor. Now, I'm mostly known for my writing on Substack, Twitter, and creating an alternate path for myself as a writer.
Zuby:No doubt, man. I think you're very much a free thinker. The term is overused sometimes, but when I look at the content you put out there, listen to your interviews, or see your writing, it's a range of very different, sometimes disparate topics, just really about what's going on with humanity and society and culture and where we are all trending. Not just seen through a simple left-right political lens like a lot of people do, but with some real insights and thought behind it. So, props to you because I think that is cool.
No doubt, man. I think you're very much a free thinker. The term is overused sometimes, but when I look at the content you put out there, listen to your interviews, or see your writing, it's a range of very different, sometimes disparate topics, just really about what's going on with humanity and society and culture and where we are all trending. Not just seen through a simple left-right political lens like a lot of people do, but with some real insights and thought behind it. So, props to you because I think that is cool.
Rob Henderson:Yeah, thanks, man. I appreciate that. I try not to...I think a lot of people want to categorize people, put them into boxes, and then they want to know, "Oh, why are you saying this? Are you coming at this from a left perspective, a right perspective? Are you progressive?" Don't get me wrong, I obviously have my disagreements with a lot of the political correctness stuff. Free thinker, I'll accept that. I wish more people would adopt that way of thinking about things. You don't have to take a stand politically on everything; you can just see where the truth leads regardless of whether it is consistent with this ideology or that.
Yeah, thanks, man. I appreciate that. I try not to...I think a lot of people want to categorize people, put them into boxes, and then they want to know, "Oh, why are you saying this? Are you coming at this from a left perspective, a right perspective? Are you progressive?" Don't get me wrong, I obviously have my disagreements with a lot of the political correctness stuff. Free thinker, I'll accept that. I wish more people would adopt that way of thinking about things. You don't have to take a stand politically on everything; you can just see where the truth leads regardless of whether it is consistent with this ideology or that.
Zuby:Why do you think that is so rare?
Why do you think that is so rare?
Rob Henderson:I did my PhD in psychology. I studied a lot of evolutionary psychology in grad school. It's a rare person who doesn't want to be...Maybe this is pejorative, but a herd animal. You want to be protected; you want to be accepted. Its adaptive. There was a study that came out in 2017, a worldwide survey across different cultures and societies. Personal safety, your physically intact body, was the number one concern that people had. Number two was reputation. People were very concerned about their social image and how they're perceived by others. There are good evolutionary reasons for that. In the ancestral environment, your reputation was critical. Being accepted by others was critical. A human would be unable to be self-sufficient in the evolutionary environment of hunting and gathering. You needed to have a community in place. We still are equipped with that same psychology today. It's very uncomfortable for people, even those I know who are independently minded free thinkers, when they've experienced some version of cancellation. They've confided in me about the anxiety, the pressure, the stress, even suicidal thoughts. There's a line from Aaron Sorkin about how getting attacked in the media is kind of like being seasick, where you think the world is ending and everyone else just thinks it's funny. From the outside, it's hard to understand, but when you are that person taking the slings and arrows... Fortunately, I haven't been in that position, but I understand it from an evolutionary psychological lens. That doesn't excuse it. If you are canceled or take a stand on something, your life won't end; you'll be fine. You know where your next meal is coming from. We can exert some control over that anxiety and should be more willing to speak our mind.
I did my PhD in psychology. I studied a lot of evolutionary psychology in grad school. It's a rare person who doesn't want to be...Maybe this is pejorative, but a herd animal. You want to be protected; you want to be accepted. Its adaptive. There was a study that came out in 2017, a worldwide survey across different cultures and societies. Personal safety, your physically intact body, was the number one concern that people had. Number two was reputation. People were very concerned about their social image and how they're perceived by others. There are good evolutionary reasons for that. In the ancestral environment, your reputation was critical. Being accepted by others was critical. A human would be unable to be self-sufficient in the evolutionary environment of hunting and gathering. You needed to have a community in place. We still are equipped with that same psychology today. It's very uncomfortable for people, even those I know who are independently minded free thinkers, when they've experienced some version of cancellation. They've confided in me about the anxiety, the pressure, the stress, even suicidal thoughts. There's a line from Aaron Sorkin about how getting attacked in the media is kind of like being seasick, where you think the world is ending and everyone else just thinks it's funny. From the outside, it's hard to understand, but when you are that person taking the slings and arrows... Fortunately, I haven't been in that position, but I understand it from an evolutionary psychological lens. That doesn't excuse it. If you are canceled or take a stand on something, your life won't end; you'll be fine. You know where your next meal is coming from. We can exert some control over that anxiety and should be more willing to speak our mind.
Zuby:That's an interesting observation. You don't even have to go back to the Pleistocene era, tens of thousands of years ago. Even in modern history and to this day, it is still true. You should care about your reputation. If someone didn't care about their reputation, they'd probably be some type of sociopath or psychopath. People like to say in the online entrepreneurship world, "Who cares what other people think? You shouldn't care about other people's opinions." I'm like, "Well, you should. You should just be judicious about whose opinions and which opinions you care about." If you're totally afraid to ever rock the boat in any way, you'll live your entire life as a coward and never do anything interesting because you'll be so afraid of risk. At the same time, if you genuinely lived your life not caring about what anybody else thought of you, you wouldn't be very well socially calibrated. You wouldn't really be able to do anything. Even if you're independent, someone like myself who's been working for himself for over a decade, I still rely on my audience and my customers. If nobody liked me, trusted me, or supported me, I wouldn't be able to earn a living. I don't need to keep a boss happy, but I can't just be totally... I've got a family. I'm going to have my own family. I've got friends. I genuinely care a lot about what they think about me. There's a balance to be found.
That's an interesting observation. You don't even have to go back to the Pleistocene era, tens of thousands of years ago. Even in modern history and to this day, it is still true. You should care about your reputation. If someone didn't care about their reputation, they'd probably be some type of sociopath or psychopath. People like to say in the online entrepreneurship world, "Who cares what other people think? You shouldn't care about other people's opinions." I'm like, "Well, you should. You should just be judicious about whose opinions and which opinions you care about." If you're totally afraid to ever rock the boat in any way, you'll live your entire life as a coward and never do anything interesting because you'll be so afraid of risk. At the same time, if you genuinely lived your life not caring about what anybody else thought of you, you wouldn't be very well socially calibrated. You wouldn't really be able to do anything. Even if you're independent, someone like myself who's been working for himself for over a decade, I still rely on my audience and my customers. If nobody liked me, trusted me, or supported me, I wouldn't be able to earn a living. I don't need to keep a boss happy, but I can't just be totally... I've got a family. I'm going to have my own family. I've got friends. I genuinely care a lot about what they think about me. There's a balance to be found.
Rob Henderson:To varying degrees, all of us care about our reputation. We all have someone to answer to, whether it's the boss in the office or your readers, followers, and subscribers. There's a difference between flouting social convention and being a rebel for the sake of it versus affirming a principle you think is important. It may upset people, but you believe it's true and that by withholding your views, you're making the world a worse place by not speaking your mind. I understand if you work a normal day job and have children and mouths to feed. Everyone's risk profile is different. But I know a lot of tenured professors and wealthy people who are surprisingly cowardly despite always having a paycheck and being secure in their occupational position. Even they, if they hold a principle or value they think is important, are unwilling to speak their mind. Everyone's risk profile is different, but it would be nice if more people in a position to do so were less afraid. I think we are starting to see that over the last couple of years. People like you, Zuby, are important. Influencers, thinkers, public intellectuals who speak their minds then give others permission to do so. If you express an opinion, post it online, do a podcast, or share a view, you signal to a subcommunity that you don't have to be bullied by society or social media into silencing yourself. It's good that platforms like yours exist.
To varying degrees, all of us care about our reputation. We all have someone to answer to, whether it's the boss in the office or your readers, followers, and subscribers. There's a difference between flouting social convention and being a rebel for the sake of it versus affirming a principle you think is important. It may upset people, but you believe it's true and that by withholding your views, you're making the world a worse place by not speaking your mind. I understand if you work a normal day job and have children and mouths to feed. Everyone's risk profile is different. But I know a lot of tenured professors and wealthy people who are surprisingly cowardly despite always having a paycheck and being secure in their occupational position. Even they, if they hold a principle or value they think is important, are unwilling to speak their mind. Everyone's risk profile is different, but it would be nice if more people in a position to do so were less afraid. I think we are starting to see that over the last couple of years. People like you, Zuby, are important. Influencers, thinkers, public intellectuals who speak their minds then give others permission to do so. If you express an opinion, post it online, do a podcast, or share a view, you signal to a subcommunity that you don't have to be bullied by society or social media into silencing yourself. It's good that platforms like yours exist.
Zuby:Thank you, man. It's part of the reason why I do it, to give others encouragement and permission to think about or have a conversation. Do you remember the third thing on that global poll? You said number one was physical safety and integrity, number two was reputation. Do you recall what the third thing was?
Thank you, man. It's part of the reason why I do it, to give others encouragement and permission to think about or have a conversation. Do you remember the third thing on that global poll? You said number one was physical safety and integrity, number two was reputation. Do you recall what the third thing was?
Rob Henderson:The main point was about reputation and its ranking. What was interesting about that paper is that in some cases, reputation seemed not to be subordinate to physical safety. In those studies, participants were asked if they would rather have their arms or legs amputated or have everyone they know believe they were a Nazi. Most people said they'd rather have their arms or legs amputated. They did the same for being a pedophile. Pedophile and Nazi are the two most evil things in our society now. Most people said they'd rather have an arm or leg amputated than have those around them believe that they are one of those two things. Another interesting study in the paper involved college students taking the Implicit Association Test, which supposedly measures how racist, sexist, or homophobic you are. They rigged it so some students were told they scored in the 99th percentile for racism and that their names and scores would be posted on the university website. They were given the option to remove their names by participating in another study, which involved putting their hands in jars of beetles and earthworms. Most people chose the disgusting experience over having their names posted as racist. This shows that while we care about our physical safety, we also care a lot about our reputation. People would rather lose a leg than be thought of as a pedophile or Nazi. People are willing to experience danger or disgust to protect their reputations.
The main point was about reputation and its ranking. What was interesting about that paper is that in some cases, reputation seemed not to be subordinate to physical safety. In those studies, participants were asked if they would rather have their arms or legs amputated or have everyone they know believe they were a Nazi. Most people said they'd rather have their arms or legs amputated. They did the same for being a pedophile. Pedophile and Nazi are the two most evil things in our society now. Most people said they'd rather have an arm or leg amputated than have those around them believe that they are one of those two things. Another interesting study in the paper involved college students taking the Implicit Association Test, which supposedly measures how racist, sexist, or homophobic you are. They rigged it so some students were told they scored in the 99th percentile for racism and that their names and scores would be posted on the university website. They were given the option to remove their names by participating in another study, which involved putting their hands in jars of beetles and earthworms. Most people chose the disgusting experience over having their names posted as racist. This shows that while we care about our physical safety, we also care a lot about our reputation. People would rather lose a leg than be thought of as a pedophile or Nazi. People are willing to experience danger or disgust to protect their reputations.
Zuby:Right, like young guys who do dangerous stunts or skateboarding tricks. People are willing to damage themselves to bolster their self-image.
Right, like young guys who do dangerous stunts or skateboarding tricks. People are willing to damage themselves to bolster their self-image.
Rob Henderson:For millennia and to this day, it's a primary recruiting technique for the military. Honor, glory, and being a hero make men risk life and limb if they think they will be rewarded, even posthumously, as heroes.
For millennia and to this day, it's a primary recruiting technique for the military. Honor, glory, and being a hero make men risk life and limb if they think they will be rewarded, even posthumously, as heroes.
Zuby:It's always been the way that it's been sold for thousands, millions of people to go out and sometimes fight wars that are not defensive or necessarily justified. But hey, if you do this thing, you're going to be a hero, right?
It's always been the way that it's been sold for thousands, millions of people to go out and sometimes fight wars that are not defensive or necessarily justified. But hey, if you do this thing, you're going to be a hero, right?
Rob Henderson:They're sacrificing or potentially sacrificing their material body for this immaterial ideal of honor or legacy or status or respect. I think for young people especially, it's a pervasive concern. Something I've long been interested in is this idea of status and how people are preoccupied with it to varying degrees. It's something people don't necessarily think about in a conscious way most of the time. When I enlisted in the military, I remember how proud people were of me and all those things. It was just a nice feeling that people try to pursue and satisfy even if they aren't 100% fully aware of it, just how responsive we are to the opinions of others.
They're sacrificing or potentially sacrificing their material body for this immaterial ideal of honor or legacy or status or respect. I think for young people especially, it's a pervasive concern. Something I've long been interested in is this idea of status and how people are preoccupied with it to varying degrees. It's something people don't necessarily think about in a conscious way most of the time. When I enlisted in the military, I remember how proud people were of me and all those things. It was just a nice feeling that people try to pursue and satisfy even if they aren't 100% fully aware of it, just how responsive we are to the opinions of others.
Zuby:Absolutely. Some of the things you're saying about reputation are not surprising because you can see how it manifests in the real world. One of the most common fears among human adults is glossophobia, which is just fear of public speaking. The vast majority of adults are afraid of public speaking, and if you think about it, it's not the speaking that they're afraid of. We all talk to people all day long, every day. If someone's afraid of public speaking, what are they really afraid of? It's connected to reputation. They're afraid they're going to stumble or trip up, make a fool of themselves in front of the public. If I say the wrong thing, fall over as I'm walking on stage, or say a joke that doesn't land, and my peers, colleagues, friends, family, or even strangers are in front of me, I'm going to be judged. I get people who say they want to start a YouTube channel, but they're afraid of it. I'm like, well, you're not afraid of opening a Google account and pressing the button to create a channel. You're probably not afraid of setting up a camera or talking into a microphone, but you are afraid that you might put the video out there, and either no one watches it and you feel like a loser, or people watch it and leave mean comments and downvote it, and you feel like an idiot. That's what it is. So many fears, next to the ones about basic survival, are about what other people are going to potentially think if they do something. It stops people from doing very simple, safe tasks just because they don't want to open themselves up to any type of criticism or judgment.
Absolutely. Some of the things you're saying about reputation are not surprising because you can see how it manifests in the real world. One of the most common fears among human adults is glossophobia, which is just fear of public speaking. The vast majority of adults are afraid of public speaking, and if you think about it, it's not the speaking that they're afraid of. We all talk to people all day long, every day. If someone's afraid of public speaking, what are they really afraid of? It's connected to reputation. They're afraid they're going to stumble or trip up, make a fool of themselves in front of the public. If I say the wrong thing, fall over as I'm walking on stage, or say a joke that doesn't land, and my peers, colleagues, friends, family, or even strangers are in front of me, I'm going to be judged. I get people who say they want to start a YouTube channel, but they're afraid of it. I'm like, well, you're not afraid of opening a Google account and pressing the button to create a channel. You're probably not afraid of setting up a camera or talking into a microphone, but you are afraid that you might put the video out there, and either no one watches it and you feel like a loser, or people watch it and leave mean comments and downvote it, and you feel like an idiot. That's what it is. So many fears, next to the ones about basic survival, are about what other people are going to potentially think if they do something. It stops people from doing very simple, safe tasks just because they don't want to open themselves up to any type of criticism or judgment.
Rob Henderson:That makes sense. There are people who weirdly take this armchair critic role for anyone who puts themselves out there, whether it's their thoughts, podcast, writing, or anything. They're sharing their views, and others will experience envy and jealousy. It comes out in weird ways because those people would like to do that too. A lot of these people wish they had the courage to do the same thing themselves. Not all of them; some people are just nitpicky jerks. But there are people who would love to start a podcast or write online, tweet more, or whatever it happens to be, and they get angry at others for doing that and want to tear you down. The point about wanting to have high regard and the fear of public speaking is interesting. I've read about this idea, the Yerkes-Dodson curve, the idea that there's an optimal level of anxiety when you perform in a public space. If you have too little anxiety, you don't perform well because you aren't taking the task seriously enough, you're kind of lethargic. If you're too anxious, you're jittery, your nerves get in the way, and you can commit some blunders. But when you have a moderate level of anxiety, your heartbeat elevates, blood pressure rises, cortisol shoots up, all those things. There was a researcher, Naomi Eisenberger from UCLA, who wrote a paper. One of her claims was that the reason why our body has this involuntary physiological response to public speaking is because, from an evolutionary perspective, if you were in a position where you were being judged by a large number of people, your body is responding to the possibility that you'll be ostracized or attacked. Essentially, all those physiological responsescortisol, blood pressure, and so onare your body's preparation for being wounded. It's activating the fight-or-flight response so you can quickly run or heal from wounds. Again, this was a hypothesis, not an empirical study, but I thought the idea was fascinating. Trying to attract the attention of so many people at once in a public setting was unusual. You were bidding for status, or a leadership position, and there was the possibility people would reject or ostracize you. Your body was preparing itself for some kind of attack or banishment. Today, it is surprising how fearful people are of public speaking. I sympathize; I understand it. One thing a lot of young people lost during the lockdown years is the experience. One of the benefits of college for people who go that path is it's supposed to prepare you for white-collar positions where you present and occupy leadership roles. It gives you a low-stakes way to present your little PowerPoint on your senior project in front of others. You're not going to be attacked or get fired; it's just a little thing you'll get a grade on. The Zoom presentations were not legit. Everyone was mailing it in, not taking it seriously. You need to be in person and have those uncomfortable experiences. Uncomfortable experiences in general are important. A lot of young people lost that resilience that could have been developed otherwise.
That makes sense. There are people who weirdly take this armchair critic role for anyone who puts themselves out there, whether it's their thoughts, podcast, writing, or anything. They're sharing their views, and others will experience envy and jealousy. It comes out in weird ways because those people would like to do that too. A lot of these people wish they had the courage to do the same thing themselves. Not all of them; some people are just nitpicky jerks. But there are people who would love to start a podcast or write online, tweet more, or whatever it happens to be, and they get angry at others for doing that and want to tear you down. The point about wanting to have high regard and the fear of public speaking is interesting. I've read about this idea, the Yerkes-Dodson curve, the idea that there's an optimal level of anxiety when you perform in a public space. If you have too little anxiety, you don't perform well because you aren't taking the task seriously enough, you're kind of lethargic. If you're too anxious, you're jittery, your nerves get in the way, and you can commit some blunders. But when you have a moderate level of anxiety, your heartbeat elevates, blood pressure rises, cortisol shoots up, all those things. There was a researcher, Naomi Eisenberger from UCLA, who wrote a paper. One of her claims was that the reason why our body has this involuntary physiological response to public speaking is because, from an evolutionary perspective, if you were in a position where you were being judged by a large number of people, your body is responding to the possibility that you'll be ostracized or attacked. Essentially, all those physiological responsescortisol, blood pressure, and so onare your body's preparation for being wounded. It's activating the fight-or-flight response so you can quickly run or heal from wounds. Again, this was a hypothesis, not an empirical study, but I thought the idea was fascinating. Trying to attract the attention of so many people at once in a public setting was unusual. You were bidding for status, or a leadership position, and there was the possibility people would reject or ostracize you. Your body was preparing itself for some kind of attack or banishment. Today, it is surprising how fearful people are of public speaking. I sympathize; I understand it. One thing a lot of young people lost during the lockdown years is the experience. One of the benefits of college for people who go that path is it's supposed to prepare you for white-collar positions where you present and occupy leadership roles. It gives you a low-stakes way to present your little PowerPoint on your senior project in front of others. You're not going to be attacked or get fired; it's just a little thing you'll get a grade on. The Zoom presentations were not legit. Everyone was mailing it in, not taking it seriously. You need to be in person and have those uncomfortable experiences. Uncomfortable experiences in general are important. A lot of young people lost that resilience that could have been developed otherwise.
Zuby:As well as the opportunity to develop those skills. A lot of people talk about confidence, and I've had young men in particular ask me how to become confident in XYZ or just in life in general. How do you become a confident speaker, the way you carry yourself, talk to people, whether they're men or women, older or young? There are many hacks on how to fake confidence, like the phrase "fake it till you make it." But true confidence comes from competence. There are many areas where I would be completely not confident because I'm not competent. If someone threw me into the cockpit of a plane in midair and said, "All right, fly this," my confidence level goes from my typical high baseline down to near zero. I don't know how to fly a plane. There are many things I don't know how to do. If you wanted me to speak on specific subjects, like astrophysics, string theory, or the history of the Israel-Palestine conflict, I'd be like, "Bro, I'm not competent enough in these areas to do this, therefore I'm not confident." But if they want me to give an impromptu presentation on the importance of physical fitness, tell the story of my life over the last 15 years, or how I started my music career or business, I'm like, "Cool, I can talk about that for hours with no preparation." So, I'm super confident in that regard. They didn't get the chance to build the competence. No one naturally is a great orator or inherently talented at it. You have to practice. You get good at listening by listening a lot, and good at speaking by speaking a lot. If I go back and listen to episodes one or two of my podcast, I'm going to find that I'm not speaking as competently, making more mistakes, using more vocal fillers, and interrupting my guest a lot. After doing hundreds of these now, I feel very confident. I could sit down with anybody from Elon Musk to Ben Shapiro to Joe Rogan for a couple of hours and not feel like I don't know what to say or do. Confidence creates competence.
As well as the opportunity to develop those skills. A lot of people talk about confidence, and I've had young men in particular ask me how to become confident in XYZ or just in life in general. How do you become a confident speaker, the way you carry yourself, talk to people, whether they're men or women, older or young? There are many hacks on how to fake confidence, like the phrase "fake it till you make it." But true confidence comes from competence. There are many areas where I would be completely not confident because I'm not competent. If someone threw me into the cockpit of a plane in midair and said, "All right, fly this," my confidence level goes from my typical high baseline down to near zero. I don't know how to fly a plane. There are many things I don't know how to do. If you wanted me to speak on specific subjects, like astrophysics, string theory, or the history of the Israel-Palestine conflict, I'd be like, "Bro, I'm not competent enough in these areas to do this, therefore I'm not confident." But if they want me to give an impromptu presentation on the importance of physical fitness, tell the story of my life over the last 15 years, or how I started my music career or business, I'm like, "Cool, I can talk about that for hours with no preparation." So, I'm super confident in that regard. They didn't get the chance to build the competence. No one naturally is a great orator or inherently talented at it. You have to practice. You get good at listening by listening a lot, and good at speaking by speaking a lot. If I go back and listen to episodes one or two of my podcast, I'm going to find that I'm not speaking as competently, making more mistakes, using more vocal fillers, and interrupting my guest a lot. After doing hundreds of these now, I feel very confident. I could sit down with anybody from Elon Musk to Ben Shapiro to Joe Rogan for a couple of hours and not feel like I don't know what to say or do. Confidence creates competence.
Rob Henderson:Putting in the reps is an underrated force. You see someone's podcast, YouTube channel, or whatever, and many people think that's the default setting without considering the thousands of hours and reps that went into it. I think about the same thing when I look at writers I admire. I look at their early posts or archives and see how they've changed in the last three to five years. I look at my own posts from the early days on my newsletter, and it's changed and mostly improved. It just takes time. A lot of young people seek the secret sauce of how to be as good a podcaster as Zuby in two weeks. To get even sort of good, you need at least two years, five years, more time, more experiences. You need some setbacks and failures to learn. Learning from others can help, but ultimately, you have to get out there, put in the reps, and start doing it. The feedback from the world and other people will be more critical in shaping your success and trajectory.
Putting in the reps is an underrated force. You see someone's podcast, YouTube channel, or whatever, and many people think that's the default setting without considering the thousands of hours and reps that went into it. I think about the same thing when I look at writers I admire. I look at their early posts or archives and see how they've changed in the last three to five years. I look at my own posts from the early days on my newsletter, and it's changed and mostly improved. It just takes time. A lot of young people seek the secret sauce of how to be as good a podcaster as Zuby in two weeks. To get even sort of good, you need at least two years, five years, more time, more experiences. You need some setbacks and failures to learn. Learning from others can help, but ultimately, you have to get out there, put in the reps, and start doing it. The feedback from the world and other people will be more critical in shaping your success and trajectory.
Zuby:Absolutely, you can't shortcut experience. It's good to listen to and read others' experiences, get advice, and learn, but you have to do the work. Whether it's nutrition, strength training, or cardiovascular training, you have to do the training and the food. You could read about Japan, look at Google Maps, and see the buildings, but there's no substitute for actually going there and experiencing it. I recommend travel to so many people. The internet and social media have created an instant gratification and shortcut mentality. People see someone who's been doing something for decades and assume they started at their current point. I've had a significant rise in popularity and success in the past five years, but I released my first album half my lifetime ago. I've been on social media since 2003, Facebook since 2004, Twitter since 2009, and YouTube since 2006. People see things now and think it's easy for me because I have a million followers or connections to Elon or other people. I started from zero, with no followers or connections, and it took time. Someone will see you in the gym and think they want to look like you in five minutes. I've been training for 22 years. You've got to do the reps, literally and metaphorically.
Absolutely, you can't shortcut experience. It's good to listen to and read others' experiences, get advice, and learn, but you have to do the work. Whether it's nutrition, strength training, or cardiovascular training, you have to do the training and the food. You could read about Japan, look at Google Maps, and see the buildings, but there's no substitute for actually going there and experiencing it. I recommend travel to so many people. The internet and social media have created an instant gratification and shortcut mentality. People see someone who's been doing something for decades and assume they started at their current point. I've had a significant rise in popularity and success in the past five years, but I released my first album half my lifetime ago. I've been on social media since 2003, Facebook since 2004, Twitter since 2009, and YouTube since 2006. People see things now and think it's easy for me because I have a million followers or connections to Elon or other people. I started from zero, with no followers or connections, and it took time. Someone will see you in the gym and think they want to look like you in five minutes. I've been training for 22 years. You've got to do the reps, literally and metaphorically.
Rob Henderson:That's well put. Everyone starts with zero followers and isn't in great shape when they first step foot in the gym. People's point of comparison is mistaken because most of the content we see is from people who've been at it for a while. When you start from scratch, it would be helpful to see what your favorite influencers' accounts looked like when they started. I don't really have that impulse to compare myself with super-successful people. I respect the work that went into successful writers, thinkers, or social media personalities. There's a lot of behind-the-scenes work and posts or podcasts that haven't done well. The famous line about comparing our bloopers to everyone else's highlight reel is true. It's funny, a lot of people actually know that rationally. In their logical mind, they know that's the case, but when they scroll Instagram or social media, they're suddenly like, "Oh, I wish I had this person's life." It's like, you know that person's showing you a narrow slice of themselves. Even for me, I wrote a whole book about my personal life, but even then, there were decisions I had to make about what to leave in and what to keep out. No one's ever getting 100% of the full picture except for the person living that life. That's something we could do more to understand. We're really only seeing maybe 5% of the person, and there's 95% that we are not seeing.
That's well put. Everyone starts with zero followers and isn't in great shape when they first step foot in the gym. People's point of comparison is mistaken because most of the content we see is from people who've been at it for a while. When you start from scratch, it would be helpful to see what your favorite influencers' accounts looked like when they started. I don't really have that impulse to compare myself with super-successful people. I respect the work that went into successful writers, thinkers, or social media personalities. There's a lot of behind-the-scenes work and posts or podcasts that haven't done well. The famous line about comparing our bloopers to everyone else's highlight reel is true. It's funny, a lot of people actually know that rationally. In their logical mind, they know that's the case, but when they scroll Instagram or social media, they're suddenly like, "Oh, I wish I had this person's life." It's like, you know that person's showing you a narrow slice of themselves. Even for me, I wrote a whole book about my personal life, but even then, there were decisions I had to make about what to leave in and what to keep out. No one's ever getting 100% of the full picture except for the person living that life. That's something we could do more to understand. We're really only seeing maybe 5% of the person, and there's 95% that we are not seeing.
Zuby:You know, I actually have an idea for a book or a movie that's very related to what you just said. Anyone listening, you're totally welcome to steal this idea because I have no interest in writing this book or making this movie, but I have this idea for a plot where you have someone who is in this mindset, who thinks that everyone else just has a better life than them. They're seeing people who have a lot of money or they've got the hot girl or the nice watch or the car or they're the CEO of the company or whatever it is. This person is just wishing and wishing and wishing that he could swap lives with other people. Then the concept would be that this actually happens. You get to experience other people's lives, not just the highlight reel as you said, not just the superficial things you see on the surface, but then you see, "Oh wow, okay, this person has this problem." You live their life and all their problems, all the crap they have to deal with. Someone might be like, "Oh, I want to be Elon Musk. I want to be the richest man in the world." Then you actually get to be the CEO of SpaceX, of Tesla, of X. You've got hundreds of thousands of people counting on you. You've got foreign governments hitting you up. You've got the media trying to kill you all in one day. You now have to deal with all of their stuff. You don't just get Elon's money; you get all of Elon's problems. You get all of his security threats, everything. I think the moral of the story would be to be careful what you wish for. Don't just assume that someone's life is inherently better than yours because you're just seeing the little surface level snapshot. You also haven't had to go through all of their history and experiences and struggles, but then you suddenly take that all on.
You know, I actually have an idea for a book or a movie that's very related to what you just said. Anyone listening, you're totally welcome to steal this idea because I have no interest in writing this book or making this movie, but I have this idea for a plot where you have someone who is in this mindset, who thinks that everyone else just has a better life than them. They're seeing people who have a lot of money or they've got the hot girl or the nice watch or the car or they're the CEO of the company or whatever it is. This person is just wishing and wishing and wishing that he could swap lives with other people. Then the concept would be that this actually happens. You get to experience other people's lives, not just the highlight reel as you said, not just the superficial things you see on the surface, but then you see, "Oh wow, okay, this person has this problem." You live their life and all their problems, all the crap they have to deal with. Someone might be like, "Oh, I want to be Elon Musk. I want to be the richest man in the world." Then you actually get to be the CEO of SpaceX, of Tesla, of X. You've got hundreds of thousands of people counting on you. You've got foreign governments hitting you up. You've got the media trying to kill you all in one day. You now have to deal with all of their stuff. You don't just get Elon's money; you get all of Elon's problems. You get all of his security threats, everything. I think the moral of the story would be to be careful what you wish for. Don't just assume that someone's life is inherently better than yours because you're just seeing the little surface level snapshot. You also haven't had to go through all of their history and experiences and struggles, but then you suddenly take that all on.
Rob Henderson:That would be a great movie. We're not really seeing the interior lives, the difficulties. Even with someone like Elon, we can piece together some of what he has to deal with from the public side, but then the internal doubts, the stress, and everything else that comes along with being in that position. All the emotions, the ups and downs, and everything that goes along with that emotionally and internally. Who would want that? I think a lot of older people are actually capable of realizing that there are certain advantages to living a simpler life because you don't have so many responsibilities weighing on you. There is a naive young person's fantasy of what being rich or famous is like. They think you just get to go to the front of the line at a fancy club or nice people come up to you and ask for your autograph or a selfie. That's maybe some of the nicer parts, a very thin slice of it. For the most part, there's just so much more going on, so many difficulties and doubts and stress, and everyone wants a piece of you. I have one-tenth of 1% of some truly famous persons public presence, but over the last couple of years, I've noticed how quickly your calendar can become overbooked. Everyone wants a piece of your time. It's not always a bad thing. Still, people have a mistaken view of what having any level of prominence is like. There's an advertising executive, Rory Sutherland, who says the optimal level of fame is to be recognized at an airport once in a while. A little bit more fame than that is nice, but not much more. Once you get to the point where you can't go outside in public anymore... I've been with Jordan Peterson in public, and he can't live a normal life anymore. Within 10 minutes, a crowd is following you. Maybe the first time it happens, or the tenth time it happens, it's kind of cool and novel. But by the hundredth time, when you realize, "Oh, I just want to go around the corner and get some groceries," and you can't do that because of security risks and other issues, that's actually not something I think most people would enjoy.
That would be a great movie. We're not really seeing the interior lives, the difficulties. Even with someone like Elon, we can piece together some of what he has to deal with from the public side, but then the internal doubts, the stress, and everything else that comes along with being in that position. All the emotions, the ups and downs, and everything that goes along with that emotionally and internally. Who would want that? I think a lot of older people are actually capable of realizing that there are certain advantages to living a simpler life because you don't have so many responsibilities weighing on you. There is a naive young person's fantasy of what being rich or famous is like. They think you just get to go to the front of the line at a fancy club or nice people come up to you and ask for your autograph or a selfie. That's maybe some of the nicer parts, a very thin slice of it. For the most part, there's just so much more going on, so many difficulties and doubts and stress, and everyone wants a piece of you. I have one-tenth of 1% of some truly famous persons public presence, but over the last couple of years, I've noticed how quickly your calendar can become overbooked. Everyone wants a piece of your time. It's not always a bad thing. Still, people have a mistaken view of what having any level of prominence is like. There's an advertising executive, Rory Sutherland, who says the optimal level of fame is to be recognized at an airport once in a while. A little bit more fame than that is nice, but not much more. Once you get to the point where you can't go outside in public anymore... I've been with Jordan Peterson in public, and he can't live a normal life anymore. Within 10 minutes, a crowd is following you. Maybe the first time it happens, or the tenth time it happens, it's kind of cool and novel. But by the hundredth time, when you realize, "Oh, I just want to go around the corner and get some groceries," and you can't do that because of security risks and other issues, that's actually not something I think most people would enjoy.
Zuby:Not at all, man. Imagine Beyonc or Eminem. From what I've heard, Eminem doesn't even leave his house. That sucks. That's just a prison. People are like, "Oh, I want that level." I've thought about this quite deeply myself about what level of fame, popularity, and notoriety would be optimal. Even the level I have right now is cool. I get recognized quite a lot. It's always fun, positive interactions. I can do meetups in different cities and countries, and people want to hang out and meet me. It's all really positive. But I'm aware there are levels. I've met a lot of people at different levels and seen how they move. I've met people who have 24/7 security everywhere they go. They're moving around with bodyguards at restaurants, the gym, everywhere. I'm like, man, that's a bit much. I'm aware there are other levels even higher than that. Actually, that would not be optimal. You've gone way past the optimum level here. I wonder if there's almost a reverse of that. Being recognized once in a while at an airport is optimal. If you can't go into an In-N-Out and eat a burger without being mobbed, you've surpassed the optimal fame. I'd still like to have that level of freedom. Most people would like the level of freedom where if you want to pick up some groceries or sit down and have a meal, it's cool if a couple of people come up and say hi. But if you can't even go outside without being interrupted or harassed or mobbed, that's not a fun life.
Not at all, man. Imagine Beyonc or Eminem. From what I've heard, Eminem doesn't even leave his house. That sucks. That's just a prison. People are like, "Oh, I want that level." I've thought about this quite deeply myself about what level of fame, popularity, and notoriety would be optimal. Even the level I have right now is cool. I get recognized quite a lot. It's always fun, positive interactions. I can do meetups in different cities and countries, and people want to hang out and meet me. It's all really positive. But I'm aware there are levels. I've met a lot of people at different levels and seen how they move. I've met people who have 24/7 security everywhere they go. They're moving around with bodyguards at restaurants, the gym, everywhere. I'm like, man, that's a bit much. I'm aware there are other levels even higher than that. Actually, that would not be optimal. You've gone way past the optimum level here. I wonder if there's almost a reverse of that. Being recognized once in a while at an airport is optimal. If you can't go into an In-N-Out and eat a burger without being mobbed, you've surpassed the optimal fame. I'd still like to have that level of freedom. Most people would like the level of freedom where if you want to pick up some groceries or sit down and have a meal, it's cool if a couple of people come up and say hi. But if you can't even go outside without being interrupted or harassed or mobbed, that's not a fun life.
Rob Henderson:Would it be worse, though, being completely unknown versus being completely mobbed? I'm not sure which I'd prefer. I could see pluses and minuses to both.
Would it be worse, though, being completely unknown versus being completely mobbed? I'm not sure which I'd prefer. I could see pluses and minuses to both.
Zuby:As long as you had money and basic level success, anonymity would be okay.
As long as you had money and basic level success, anonymity would be okay.
Rob Henderson:Yeah, definitely. If you were a billionaire, it's probably better to be an anonymous billionaire than one who's recognized everywhere. If that were the dichotomy, it would be much better and safer to be the anonymous one. You don't need to deal with all the security risks and constant protection. Imagine you have children or a wife, and you've got to constantly be moving for safety and protection. Think of people trying to scam you, defraud you, or abduct your kids. There are levels to it.
Yeah, definitely. If you were a billionaire, it's probably better to be an anonymous billionaire than one who's recognized everywhere. If that were the dichotomy, it would be much better and safer to be the anonymous one. You don't need to deal with all the security risks and constant protection. Imagine you have children or a wife, and you've got to constantly be moving for safety and protection. Think of people trying to scam you, defraud you, or abduct your kids. There are levels to it.
Zuby:I want to switch subjects a little bit, Rob, because I know you've talked a lot about the idea of luxury beliefs. This is a term that I myself have used in multiple podcasts. I'm certain to always give you credit whenever I mention it. I think I mentioned it in my podcast with Elon Musk when we were talking about homelessness. No, it wasn't about homelessness in San Francisco. I used it in reference to some things done under the name of environmentalism and climate change. There are certain nations, especially developed Western countries, built on fossil fuels and certain things. Then they want to pull up the ladder on countries like China, India, and African countries, having this mentality of just banning fossil fuels. You're like, dude, no. That's not going to work on a local level, let alone an international one. Tell me about luxury beliefs.
I want to switch subjects a little bit, Rob, because I know you've talked a lot about the idea of luxury beliefs. This is a term that I myself have used in multiple podcasts. I'm certain to always give you credit whenever I mention it. I think I mentioned it in my podcast with Elon Musk when we were talking about homelessness. No, it wasn't about homelessness in San Francisco. I used it in reference to some things done under the name of environmentalism and climate change. There are certain nations, especially developed Western countries, built on fossil fuels and certain things. Then they want to pull up the ladder on countries like China, India, and African countries, having this mentality of just banning fossil fuels. You're like, dude, no. That's not going to work on a local level, let alone an international one. Tell me about luxury beliefs.
Rob Henderson:I developed the luxury beliefs framework in 2019. It arose from personal observations at Yale and other elite universities, and through careful reading of sociological and psychological research on class and status signaling. Luxury beliefs are ideas and opinions that confer status on the upper class while inflicting costs on everyone else. A core feature of a luxury belief is that the believer is sheltered from the consequences of their belief. If you espouse a certain view, it makes you look interesting and sophisticated. You're signaling your education and cultural capital and position in society. Often, you'll get applause from your similarly affluent peers. But once that view becomes policy or popular in the culture, other people will suffer. Often, the people espousing the beliefs experience little to no penalty whatsoever. The climate thing is interesting. I just saw these survey results reported in the Wall Street Journal from Rasmussen. They compared the views of ordinary Americans to what they termed elites. People debate what elite means. In this survey, they defined elites as Americans with a postgraduate degree, earning at least $150,000 a year, living in metropolitan areas. Not the perfect definition, but it gets close to what people picture as an elite. They compared what these people think to ordinary Americans about things like banning fossil fuels, gas stovetops, combustion engines, and implementing rationing policies around electricity and meat consumption. The elites were far more supportive, with 70-plus percent supporting rationing meat and electricity to battle climate change. The vast majority of ordinary Americans were strongly opposed. There's a massive gap between elites, highly educated and financially comfortable people, and ordinary Americans. The elites have weird views around social experimentation, what people should eat, drive, and how they should live their lives, both within their own countries and in developing countries. The upper class, fortunate and primarily in Western societies, are attempting to kick away the ladder. The genealogy around the luxury beliefs idea shows that luxury beliefs have, to a large extent, replaced luxury goods. People still signal status with material possessions, but it's harder to identify who's rich and who's poor today relative to 100 years ago. If you walked through Manhattan 100 years ago, it was clear who was rich and who was poor by how they dressed. The rich guy wore a top hat, pocket watch, and monocle, and it was clear he was a member of high society. Poor people wore clothes that identified them as poor. Today, material possessions are a noisier signal of social position. In 1899, Thorstein Veblen, an economist and sociologist, wrote "The Theory of the Leisure Class." The upper class at the turn of the 20th century wore tuxedos and evening gowns, attended lavish events, had butlers and servants, and took part in expensive hobbies like golf. Ordinary people worked manual labor jobs. Fast forward to the mid-20th century, and sociologist Pierre Bourdieu wrote "Distinction: A Social Critique of the Judgment of Taste." He coined the term cultural capital. The upper classes converted economic capital into cultural capital, spending money to learn about intricate and expensive ideas and developing tastes and habits. At that point, it was about learning the intricacies and subtleties of art, wine, furniture, and other arcane subjects. Today, luxury beliefs are a manifestation of cultural capital. If you're able to present and exert the intellectual acrobatics necessary to explain why we should be rationing meat, not driving certain cars, defunding the police, or downplaying the importance of marriage and promoting polyamorous relationships, you're signaling your education and sophistication. It shows you went to an expensive university, read the right publications, listened to the right podcasts, and are plugged into the cultural elite, the tastemaking class. There was this book that came out a couple of years ago by Michael Knox Beran about WASPs, White Anglo-Saxon Protestants. These were the American ruling class from the mid-19th to the mid-20th century. The author, Michael Knox Beran, writes about how many WASPs would support fashionable movements because they upset what they described as the vulgarians, the masses, ordinary people. So, I'm going to support movement X, Y, or Z, in part because it makes me sound sophisticated and interesting, but also because I know that the deplorables, the vulgarians, the masses, this is so at odds with how they look at the world that it gives me a bit of pleasure to know that they're upset about this. If I'm promoting polyamory or how we should be eating bugs or whatever, it's going to upset them, so let's promote this movement a bit more. There are a lot of moving parts here, but ultimately, the luxury belief's idea is, look at the position I'm in. I'm at or near the apex of society, and that's really what's driving a lot of the luxury beliefs idea. Some of it, I think, is malice, but a lot of it is just naive too.
I developed the luxury beliefs framework in 2019. It arose from personal observations at Yale and other elite universities, and through careful reading of sociological and psychological research on class and status signaling. Luxury beliefs are ideas and opinions that confer status on the upper class while inflicting costs on everyone else. A core feature of a luxury belief is that the believer is sheltered from the consequences of their belief. If you espouse a certain view, it makes you look interesting and sophisticated. You're signaling your education and cultural capital and position in society. Often, you'll get applause from your similarly affluent peers. But once that view becomes policy or popular in the culture, other people will suffer. Often, the people espousing the beliefs experience little to no penalty whatsoever. The climate thing is interesting. I just saw these survey results reported in the Wall Street Journal from Rasmussen. They compared the views of ordinary Americans to what they termed elites. People debate what elite means. In this survey, they defined elites as Americans with a postgraduate degree, earning at least $150,000 a year, living in metropolitan areas. Not the perfect definition, but it gets close to what people picture as an elite. They compared what these people think to ordinary Americans about things like banning fossil fuels, gas stovetops, combustion engines, and implementing rationing policies around electricity and meat consumption. The elites were far more supportive, with 70-plus percent supporting rationing meat and electricity to battle climate change. The vast majority of ordinary Americans were strongly opposed. There's a massive gap between elites, highly educated and financially comfortable people, and ordinary Americans. The elites have weird views around social experimentation, what people should eat, drive, and how they should live their lives, both within their own countries and in developing countries. The upper class, fortunate and primarily in Western societies, are attempting to kick away the ladder. The genealogy around the luxury beliefs idea shows that luxury beliefs have, to a large extent, replaced luxury goods. People still signal status with material possessions, but it's harder to identify who's rich and who's poor today relative to 100 years ago. If you walked through Manhattan 100 years ago, it was clear who was rich and who was poor by how they dressed. The rich guy wore a top hat, pocket watch, and monocle, and it was clear he was a member of high society. Poor people wore clothes that identified them as poor. Today, material possessions are a noisier signal of social position. In 1899, Thorstein Veblen, an economist and sociologist, wrote "The Theory of the Leisure Class." The upper class at the turn of the 20th century wore tuxedos and evening gowns, attended lavish events, had butlers and servants, and took part in expensive hobbies like golf. Ordinary people worked manual labor jobs. Fast forward to the mid-20th century, and sociologist Pierre Bourdieu wrote "Distinction: A Social Critique of the Judgment of Taste." He coined the term cultural capital. The upper classes converted economic capital into cultural capital, spending money to learn about intricate and expensive ideas and developing tastes and habits. At that point, it was about learning the intricacies and subtleties of art, wine, furniture, and other arcane subjects. Today, luxury beliefs are a manifestation of cultural capital. If you're able to present and exert the intellectual acrobatics necessary to explain why we should be rationing meat, not driving certain cars, defunding the police, or downplaying the importance of marriage and promoting polyamorous relationships, you're signaling your education and sophistication. It shows you went to an expensive university, read the right publications, listened to the right podcasts, and are plugged into the cultural elite, the tastemaking class. There was this book that came out a couple of years ago by Michael Knox Beran about WASPs, White Anglo-Saxon Protestants. These were the American ruling class from the mid-19th to the mid-20th century. The author, Michael Knox Beran, writes about how many WASPs would support fashionable movements because they upset what they described as the vulgarians, the masses, ordinary people. So, I'm going to support movement X, Y, or Z, in part because it makes me sound sophisticated and interesting, but also because I know that the deplorables, the vulgarians, the masses, this is so at odds with how they look at the world that it gives me a bit of pleasure to know that they're upset about this. If I'm promoting polyamory or how we should be eating bugs or whatever, it's going to upset them, so let's promote this movement a bit more. There are a lot of moving parts here, but ultimately, the luxury belief's idea is, look at the position I'm in. I'm at or near the apex of society, and that's really what's driving a lot of the luxury beliefs idea. Some of it, I think, is malice, but a lot of it is just naive too.
Zuby:Yeah, absolutely. It's interesting because there's quite a range of luxury beliefs. I think they sort of range from silly and goofy to downright potentially destructive to society when they're actually implemented or if they were to be adopted on any type of scale. An obvious example from recent years is the defund the police, abolish the police thing. The people saying that are not living in communities and areas where there's lots of crime or gang violence. You're totally isolated and physically separated from the potential threat, so you can sit there in your nice house and think, "Oh, this sounds like a nice idea. It sounds kind of cool and progressive or whatever." Then you actually have places that implemented such policies, and lo and behold, as any reasonable person would predict, what happens? Crime rate goes up, shoplifting goes up, more people are becoming victims of assault, and so on and so forth. Something like that is very destructive. Or you could take open border policies. You have people who are physically separated from the whole battleground and all the problems. Their jobs are not at risk. If you're earning over $150,000 a year, you're probably not worried that an illegal migrant is going to come and take your job or force your wages down. However, if you're on the lower end of the socioeconomic scale and your city, state, or country is flooded with hundreds of thousands or millions of new people who are happy and willing to work for lower wages, now you've got to compete with all of that and you bear the brunt of it. You brought up the idea around marriage and family dynamics. People can talk about how marriage and monogamy are outdated. They're sitting in their heterosexual, monogamous, married relationship and then preaching to the masses about how they don't have to do it the way they did. Their kids are probably going to be fine and insulated, but if other people were to adopt that and actually put it into practice, then society is going to be in major trouble. You can find a handful of people where doing all these weird relationship dynamics works for them, but the vast majority of people who try it do not succeed. If you were to make this the norm across millions of people, that's the kind of belief that could crater your entire society.
Yeah, absolutely. It's interesting because there's quite a range of luxury beliefs. I think they sort of range from silly and goofy to downright potentially destructive to society when they're actually implemented or if they were to be adopted on any type of scale. An obvious example from recent years is the defund the police, abolish the police thing. The people saying that are not living in communities and areas where there's lots of crime or gang violence. You're totally isolated and physically separated from the potential threat, so you can sit there in your nice house and think, "Oh, this sounds like a nice idea. It sounds kind of cool and progressive or whatever." Then you actually have places that implemented such policies, and lo and behold, as any reasonable person would predict, what happens? Crime rate goes up, shoplifting goes up, more people are becoming victims of assault, and so on and so forth. Something like that is very destructive. Or you could take open border policies. You have people who are physically separated from the whole battleground and all the problems. Their jobs are not at risk. If you're earning over $150,000 a year, you're probably not worried that an illegal migrant is going to come and take your job or force your wages down. However, if you're on the lower end of the socioeconomic scale and your city, state, or country is flooded with hundreds of thousands or millions of new people who are happy and willing to work for lower wages, now you've got to compete with all of that and you bear the brunt of it. You brought up the idea around marriage and family dynamics. People can talk about how marriage and monogamy are outdated. They're sitting in their heterosexual, monogamous, married relationship and then preaching to the masses about how they don't have to do it the way they did. Their kids are probably going to be fine and insulated, but if other people were to adopt that and actually put it into practice, then society is going to be in major trouble. You can find a handful of people where doing all these weird relationship dynamics works for them, but the vast majority of people who try it do not succeed. If you were to make this the norm across millions of people, that's the kind of belief that could crater your entire society.
Rob Henderson:100%. The marriage one was one of the original luxury beliefs for me when I first started developing this idea. Where I grew up, no one was raised in an intact two-parent home. I was raised in foster homes. I had friends raised by single moms, one friend raised by a single dad, another friend raised by his grandmother because his mom was on drugs and his dad was in prison. Those were very normal stories in the working-class area of California where I grew up. Then I get to Yale, and literally just about everyone is raised by both their birth parents. If you look statistically, 90% of college-educated women, college-educated mothers, are married. Whereas for people whose highest level of education is a high school diploma, among women, among mothers, something like 60% of births are out of wedlock. There's a massive class and educational disparity there. In 1960, 95% of kids in the US were raised by both of their birth parents regardless of social class. If you fast forward to 2005, for the upper class, it dropped slightly from 95% to 85%, a slight dip. But for the working class, it dropped from 95% to 30%, a massive steep decline. This can't necessarily be the result of economics because there were poor people in 1962, and poverty in 1960 was probably worse because that was before the Great Society programs and all these state benefits. A lot of this has to be the result of cultural forces too, of the examples that elite set. There's a lot of good research that elite opinion actually does contribute to how people live their lives and develop their habits. The examples they see around them from highly respected people, whether on TV or through pundits or just sort of in the air, the atmosphere of which ideas and lifestyles are acceptable and praised and which ones aren't. Marriage used to be very respected and praised and kind of the default path for people. Now it's if you want to, you can. If you don't, it's okay too. It could range as far as actually marriage is patriarchal, oppressive, and you shouldn't do this. Meanwhile, the women, in many cases, and some of the men too who are expressing this view, they themselves are highly educated, the products of two-parent families, and they themselves plan to carry that benefit forward and get married and raise their own kids. There is that element of duplicity. It's funny what you said about relationship arrangements. Certain people may find a way to live in a polycule and make it work for them. If you want to live with your wife's boyfriend, somehow that can work for them, whatever. But in most cases, if that works, those people tend to have unique personality profiles, highly educated, just atypical. It may work for them, but for people who aren't in the same categories of personality and education and all those other things, if they attempt to live that way, often it will break down very quickly. Most people have natural feelings of jealousy and romantic commitments. If you introduce other people into that relationship, things usually fall apart very quickly. What it reminded me of is this idea around veganism or vegetarianism. If you are, again, unique personality profile, highly educated, and affluent, you can invest the time and resources into mapping out your diet to receive adequate nutrition without eating meat. But if you're a poor person in a developing country and you hear Western elites saying you shouldn't be eating meat anymore, what are your options for receiving adequate nutrition? I remember, Zuby, I was sitting at this meeting at Cambridge University with all these Cambridge dons and professors. There was this girl with me, another student. We were both PhD students. She was from the Philippines. I knew a little bit about her background, how she had grown up in a village, got a scholarship, and managed to get into Cambridge for a postgraduate degree. All these highfalutin Cambridge professors were like, "I don't understand why people would like to eat meat. Don't they understand?" Basically adopting this very snooty, elitist attitude around why would anyone eat meat? Why shouldn't vegetarianism or veganism be the default? If you're a professor at Cambridge and you have a PhD and you've never had to worry about where your next meal is coming from, that's one thing. But this girl, this young woman from the Philippines, is giving me the side-eye because her parents are living in a village, and meat is something to look forward to. If you're working backbreaking labor, working hard all day out in the sun, and you don't have that many sources of nutrition, what is she supposed to think about what these professors think of her, her family, and her culture? I remember she and I would talk. She wasn't a political person, but that was a moment that radicalized her. She was like, "Oh, this is not the kind of place I thought it would be." There's a lot of messaging at these institutions around tolerance, open-mindedness, and diversity. But once they actually start to learn about how people from developing countries think or their lifestyles or what they do, they disapprove of a lot of it. Anyone who doesn't live like an upper-middle-class, highly educated person, they actually do, many of them, not all, but many of them do look down on those people or think of them as backward or retrograde.
100%. The marriage one was one of the original luxury beliefs for me when I first started developing this idea. Where I grew up, no one was raised in an intact two-parent home. I was raised in foster homes. I had friends raised by single moms, one friend raised by a single dad, another friend raised by his grandmother because his mom was on drugs and his dad was in prison. Those were very normal stories in the working-class area of California where I grew up. Then I get to Yale, and literally just about everyone is raised by both their birth parents. If you look statistically, 90% of college-educated women, college-educated mothers, are married. Whereas for people whose highest level of education is a high school diploma, among women, among mothers, something like 60% of births are out of wedlock. There's a massive class and educational disparity there. In 1960, 95% of kids in the US were raised by both of their birth parents regardless of social class. If you fast forward to 2005, for the upper class, it dropped slightly from 95% to 85%, a slight dip. But for the working class, it dropped from 95% to 30%, a massive steep decline. This can't necessarily be the result of economics because there were poor people in 1962, and poverty in 1960 was probably worse because that was before the Great Society programs and all these state benefits. A lot of this has to be the result of cultural forces too, of the examples that elite set. There's a lot of good research that elite opinion actually does contribute to how people live their lives and develop their habits. The examples they see around them from highly respected people, whether on TV or through pundits or just sort of in the air, the atmosphere of which ideas and lifestyles are acceptable and praised and which ones aren't. Marriage used to be very respected and praised and kind of the default path for people. Now it's if you want to, you can. If you don't, it's okay too. It could range as far as actually marriage is patriarchal, oppressive, and you shouldn't do this. Meanwhile, the women, in many cases, and some of the men too who are expressing this view, they themselves are highly educated, the products of two-parent families, and they themselves plan to carry that benefit forward and get married and raise their own kids. There is that element of duplicity. It's funny what you said about relationship arrangements. Certain people may find a way to live in a polycule and make it work for them. If you want to live with your wife's boyfriend, somehow that can work for them, whatever. But in most cases, if that works, those people tend to have unique personality profiles, highly educated, just atypical. It may work for them, but for people who aren't in the same categories of personality and education and all those other things, if they attempt to live that way, often it will break down very quickly. Most people have natural feelings of jealousy and romantic commitments. If you introduce other people into that relationship, things usually fall apart very quickly. What it reminded me of is this idea around veganism or vegetarianism. If you are, again, unique personality profile, highly educated, and affluent, you can invest the time and resources into mapping out your diet to receive adequate nutrition without eating meat. But if you're a poor person in a developing country and you hear Western elites saying you shouldn't be eating meat anymore, what are your options for receiving adequate nutrition? I remember, Zuby, I was sitting at this meeting at Cambridge University with all these Cambridge dons and professors. There was this girl with me, another student. We were both PhD students. She was from the Philippines. I knew a little bit about her background, how she had grown up in a village, got a scholarship, and managed to get into Cambridge for a postgraduate degree. All these highfalutin Cambridge professors were like, "I don't understand why people would like to eat meat. Don't they understand?" Basically adopting this very snooty, elitist attitude around why would anyone eat meat? Why shouldn't vegetarianism or veganism be the default? If you're a professor at Cambridge and you have a PhD and you've never had to worry about where your next meal is coming from, that's one thing. But this girl, this young woman from the Philippines, is giving me the side-eye because her parents are living in a village, and meat is something to look forward to. If you're working backbreaking labor, working hard all day out in the sun, and you don't have that many sources of nutrition, what is she supposed to think about what these professors think of her, her family, and her culture? I remember she and I would talk. She wasn't a political person, but that was a moment that radicalized her. She was like, "Oh, this is not the kind of place I thought it would be." There's a lot of messaging at these institutions around tolerance, open-mindedness, and diversity. But once they actually start to learn about how people from developing countries think or their lifestyles or what they do, they disapprove of a lot of it. Anyone who doesn't live like an upper-middle-class, highly educated person, they actually do, many of them, not all, but many of them do look down on those people or think of them as backward or retrograde.
Zuby:It's interesting, man. There are so many interesting points you raised there. I was going to say that you were talking about these polycules or whatever. I think what's really going on there is massive amounts of cope. There's a lot of cope going on. Anytime you even talk to or see on the internet people who are trying to work out these types of situations, whether it's on Reddit or anywhere else, they're all there like, "We're trying to do this thing, but I keep feeling jealous. I'm trying to get over jealousy." I'm like, "Bro, that is the feeling you are supposed to have." Whether you're coming at this from an evolutionary perspective, a religious perspective, or just a sane critical thinking perspective, they're all trying to figure out how to get rid of this emotion, how to stop feeling this way. It's like, "Dude, you do it by doing things the way people have generally been doing them for thousands of years." Our ancestors didn't come up with these institutions and ideas just to be mean and restrictive or hyper-intolerant. They found that this works in all these different nations and societies with different traditions. They found out that this generally works. In this Enlightenment era, people are like, "Actually, let's go completely against nature. Let's go completely against everything that seems to make sense and try to overcome all these barriers." It would be like if there's some disgusting thing I'm not supposed to eat. It looks disgusting, it smells disgusting, it's nasty, and I'm trying to consume it. I'm going on the internet and blogging, "Man, I don't know why I can't just consume this thing. Every time I try, I don't like it." It's your body screaming at you. It's thousands of years of your ancestors screaming at you not to do that thing.
It's interesting, man. There are so many interesting points you raised there. I was going to say that you were talking about these polycules or whatever. I think what's really going on there is massive amounts of cope. There's a lot of cope going on. Anytime you even talk to or see on the internet people who are trying to work out these types of situations, whether it's on Reddit or anywhere else, they're all there like, "We're trying to do this thing, but I keep feeling jealous. I'm trying to get over jealousy." I'm like, "Bro, that is the feeling you are supposed to have." Whether you're coming at this from an evolutionary perspective, a religious perspective, or just a sane critical thinking perspective, they're all trying to figure out how to get rid of this emotion, how to stop feeling this way. It's like, "Dude, you do it by doing things the way people have generally been doing them for thousands of years." Our ancestors didn't come up with these institutions and ideas just to be mean and restrictive or hyper-intolerant. They found that this works in all these different nations and societies with different traditions. They found out that this generally works. In this Enlightenment era, people are like, "Actually, let's go completely against nature. Let's go completely against everything that seems to make sense and try to overcome all these barriers." It would be like if there's some disgusting thing I'm not supposed to eat. It looks disgusting, it smells disgusting, it's nasty, and I'm trying to consume it. I'm going on the internet and blogging, "Man, I don't know why I can't just consume this thing. Every time I try, I don't like it." It's your body screaming at you. It's thousands of years of your ancestors screaming at you not to do that thing.
Rob Henderson:That's a really useful analogy because society didn't teach you to hate eating that thing. The jealousy thing is really interesting because a lot of people who promote non-monogamy, ethical non-monogamy, say, "You were brainwashed by society to be possessive and jealous, and you just got to get over that social conditioning." Actually, you're the one who's trying to socially condition the rest of us into eliminating that very natural feeling. It's very interesting. There's a lot of topsy-turvy beliefs around what's natural and what's not. They think that what's natural has been socially conditioned, but what's socially conditioned is actually natural. It reminds me of the weird gymnastics involved with trying to thread the needle around men and women and the trans stuff. I wrote this thing on X a while back about how the belief now is if there's a male who wants to dress up and behave like a woman, he was born that way. If there's a female who likes to dress up and behave like a woman, she was brainwashed by society. That's kind of where we're at now. The man who wears the dress and does all these things, he was born that way, who are you to judge? But a woman behaves in a feminine manner, she was taught to behave like that, and she needs to break out of it. It's very inconsistent; it doesn't make sense. That's where we are now. Nature is the thing to get over, and they believe we get over it by telling us it's social conditioning.
That's a really useful analogy because society didn't teach you to hate eating that thing. The jealousy thing is really interesting because a lot of people who promote non-monogamy, ethical non-monogamy, say, "You were brainwashed by society to be possessive and jealous, and you just got to get over that social conditioning." Actually, you're the one who's trying to socially condition the rest of us into eliminating that very natural feeling. It's very interesting. There's a lot of topsy-turvy beliefs around what's natural and what's not. They think that what's natural has been socially conditioned, but what's socially conditioned is actually natural. It reminds me of the weird gymnastics involved with trying to thread the needle around men and women and the trans stuff. I wrote this thing on X a while back about how the belief now is if there's a male who wants to dress up and behave like a woman, he was born that way. If there's a female who likes to dress up and behave like a woman, she was brainwashed by society. That's kind of where we're at now. The man who wears the dress and does all these things, he was born that way, who are you to judge? But a woman behaves in a feminine manner, she was taught to behave like that, and she needs to break out of it. It's very inconsistent; it doesn't make sense. That's where we are now. Nature is the thing to get over, and they believe we get over it by telling us it's social conditioning.
Zuby:I find that in modern Western society, we spend a lot of time pontificating. We're pontificating right now. Sometimes I wonder if that's part of the problem. People are spending too much time in their own heads. Even when people talk about mental health and all that stuff, I think if you literally just keep your body physically moving, doing hard things, taking on tasks, and battling against yourself, fellow man, nature, the environment, animals, whatever, struggling to survive, you don't have time for anxiety or depression. You're just getting on with all these things. Now, we just live in a time where people spend so much time in their own heads, and then they spend time in other people's heads via social media. You're not even meant to be able to see so many people's opinions, thoughts, and ideas and so much information. It doesn't even matter what country you live in. Wherever you live, something crazy happens today in Australia, and within minutes, people in the USA, UK, all over the world are aware of it and talking about it. I can be chilling in Dubai and know what's going on today in California. Whereas in the past, not so long ago, you just had your own local issues. You weren't seeing all these horrible and crazy things happening elsewhere, and you weren't seeing everyone else's running commentary on it 24/7 with infinite scroll. This is why people are going crazy. I'm blessed to have a personality that's very low in neuroticism. Compared to most people, I'm very insensitive to negative feelings and emotions, but most people are not wired that way. If you're someone who is more emotionally sensitive and prone to negative emotions, and all day every day you're continuously scrolling through this thing for hours a day that's amplifying things to make you anxioushere's another thing to be afraid of, another terrible thing that happened, a video of a violent incident, something else terrible going on, something to make you disgusted, something to make you angryif you're on the left, here's something from the right to annoy you; if you're on the right, here's something from the left to annoy you. There are literal algorithms feeding it to you. Then you turn it off, eat your meal, and turn on TV, whether it's CNN, Fox News, or whatever, and they're still battering you with more and more information. People are consuming this for hours a day. The average American watches two hours of TV a day and spends three to four hours on social media. For every person who watches no TV, there's another person watching four, six, eight hours of it. This is why people are going crazy.
I find that in modern Western society, we spend a lot of time pontificating. We're pontificating right now. Sometimes I wonder if that's part of the problem. People are spending too much time in their own heads. Even when people talk about mental health and all that stuff, I think if you literally just keep your body physically moving, doing hard things, taking on tasks, and battling against yourself, fellow man, nature, the environment, animals, whatever, struggling to survive, you don't have time for anxiety or depression. You're just getting on with all these things. Now, we just live in a time where people spend so much time in their own heads, and then they spend time in other people's heads via social media. You're not even meant to be able to see so many people's opinions, thoughts, and ideas and so much information. It doesn't even matter what country you live in. Wherever you live, something crazy happens today in Australia, and within minutes, people in the USA, UK, all over the world are aware of it and talking about it. I can be chilling in Dubai and know what's going on today in California. Whereas in the past, not so long ago, you just had your own local issues. You weren't seeing all these horrible and crazy things happening elsewhere, and you weren't seeing everyone else's running commentary on it 24/7 with infinite scroll. This is why people are going crazy. I'm blessed to have a personality that's very low in neuroticism. Compared to most people, I'm very insensitive to negative feelings and emotions, but most people are not wired that way. If you're someone who is more emotionally sensitive and prone to negative emotions, and all day every day you're continuously scrolling through this thing for hours a day that's amplifying things to make you anxioushere's another thing to be afraid of, another terrible thing that happened, a video of a violent incident, something else terrible going on, something to make you disgusted, something to make you angryif you're on the left, here's something from the right to annoy you; if you're on the right, here's something from the left to annoy you. There are literal algorithms feeding it to you. Then you turn it off, eat your meal, and turn on TV, whether it's CNN, Fox News, or whatever, and they're still battering you with more and more information. People are consuming this for hours a day. The average American watches two hours of TV a day and spends three to four hours on social media. For every person who watches no TV, there's another person watching four, six, eight hours of it. This is why people are going crazy.
Rob Henderson:Only about 30 to 40% of young adults have ever downloaded a dating app and actually use them. A plurality of young people meet through dating apps, but it's not the majority. Most people still are not meeting their partners through online dating, especially in places like university environments or young professional situations just outside of that space. When these guys say, "Oh, if you're not six feet tall," it's like, if you go outside, you'll see guys who aren't six feet tall, and they have a girlfriend. Most people are actually not single. I think the largest number of people who are single are young men, but a lot of it is because of those self-defeating behaviors, those debilitating doubts and everything. When I had no recognition and was just a regular dude, if you just go out and talk to girls, eventually you'll get a girlfriend. That's just the nature of it, right? Half of the population are women. You just go out and talk to people. Most people throughout history have figured it out. It's really toxic. A lot of these guys are afraid of rejection. They're afraid to put themselves out there. To avoid that uncomfortable experience of approaching, taking risks, and talking to a girl, they just immerse themselves in these statistics and develop these elaborate, pseudoscientific explanations for why it's hopeless and why they shouldn't even bother. They hear some story about some guy getting cheated on and think, "Oh, that's how women are, so I might as well not talk to women because you're going to get cheated on." They cling to these outlier events so that they themselves don't have to be courageous in their own way. Young men have to be prepared to be rebuffed or turned down. It's just part of life. If you like a girl, she may turn you down. That's okay. That's just life. Now, no one wants to take that risk anymore. All of that stuff online on social media spills out. What's funny is I'm old enough, and I think you're probably old enough, to see what started on the internet, like red pill Reddit, manosphere stuff. It was kind of niche, kind of weird. It was internet culture, and now that is the dominant culture. I talk to handsome, good-looking jocks who talk about red pill stuff. Ten years ago, that archetypal dude, the captain of the football team, wouldn't be talking about red pill Reddit. But now they are. It's mind-blowing how steeped in this kind of internet culture young people are. In the long run, I don't think it's going to be good. We're due for a correction. Young people have always met each other, gone on dates, and figured it out. I think we'll get there, but it's going to take some time.
Only about 30 to 40% of young adults have ever downloaded a dating app and actually use them. A plurality of young people meet through dating apps, but it's not the majority. Most people still are not meeting their partners through online dating, especially in places like university environments or young professional situations just outside of that space. When these guys say, "Oh, if you're not six feet tall," it's like, if you go outside, you'll see guys who aren't six feet tall, and they have a girlfriend. Most people are actually not single. I think the largest number of people who are single are young men, but a lot of it is because of those self-defeating behaviors, those debilitating doubts and everything. When I had no recognition and was just a regular dude, if you just go out and talk to girls, eventually you'll get a girlfriend. That's just the nature of it, right? Half of the population are women. You just go out and talk to people. Most people throughout history have figured it out. It's really toxic. A lot of these guys are afraid of rejection. They're afraid to put themselves out there. To avoid that uncomfortable experience of approaching, taking risks, and talking to a girl, they just immerse themselves in these statistics and develop these elaborate, pseudoscientific explanations for why it's hopeless and why they shouldn't even bother. They hear some story about some guy getting cheated on and think, "Oh, that's how women are, so I might as well not talk to women because you're going to get cheated on." They cling to these outlier events so that they themselves don't have to be courageous in their own way. Young men have to be prepared to be rebuffed or turned down. It's just part of life. If you like a girl, she may turn you down. That's okay. That's just life. Now, no one wants to take that risk anymore. All of that stuff online on social media spills out. What's funny is I'm old enough, and I think you're probably old enough, to see what started on the internet, like red pill Reddit, manosphere stuff. It was kind of niche, kind of weird. It was internet culture, and now that is the dominant culture. I talk to handsome, good-looking jocks who talk about red pill stuff. Ten years ago, that archetypal dude, the captain of the football team, wouldn't be talking about red pill Reddit. But now they are. It's mind-blowing how steeped in this kind of internet culture young people are. In the long run, I don't think it's going to be good. We're due for a correction. Young people have always met each other, gone on dates, and figured it out. I think we'll get there, but it's going to take some time.
Comments
Restacks
Top
Latest
Discussions

Rob Henderson

Rob Henderson

Rob Henderson

Rob Henderson

Rob Henderson

Rob Henderson

Rob Henderson

Rob Henderson

Rob Henderson

Rob Henderson


undefined subscriptions will be displayed on your profile (edit)
Skip for now
For your security, we need to re-authenticate you.
Click the link we sent to sasha.p.podolsky@gmail.com, orclick here to sign in.