

1
Book meeting
Book a meeting
Below is the fourth chapter of my forthcomingbook,Troubled: A Memoir of Foster Care, Family, and Social Class.
Below is the fourth chapter of my forthcoming
,
In case you missed them, here are the links for thepreface,Chapter One,Chapter Two, andChapter Three.
In case you missed them, here are the links for the
,
,
, and
.
As I mentioned in the preface, I have 1 small request.
After you read the preface and these first 4 chapters, I ask that you please write a short review/reaction andshare it here on this form.
After you read the preface and these first 4 chapters, I ask that you please write a short review/reaction and
.
Or, if you prefer, you can also email me your review (rob@robkhenderson.com).
It doesnt have to be anything elaborate or ornate. Just a couple of brief sentences outlining your thoughts that you can later post on Amazon/Goodreads. If at least 50 readers share their reviews after reading this chapter, then Ill continue to share additional installments ofTroubledwith you here on my Substack.
Upon the official date of publication (February 20, 2024), Ill request that you please share your review on Amazon or Goodreads. Preferably both. James Clear, the author ofAtomic Habits, told me that getting 100 (and ideally 1,000) Amazon reviews within the first week of publication is a key metric that determines a books success. As you probably know, potential readers who are unfamiliar with a book or its author rely on reviews before buying. And in order for a book to get the attention of the people who shape culture and policy, it usually has to sell well in its first week.
If all of my premium subscribers share their reviews on Amazon during launch week in February (which I know is unlikely, but I am asking), that would amount to more than 1,800 reviews. So Im gathering early reviews now and will ask you to post them when the time comes.
Throughout the process of writing this book it became apparent to me that, however much the social sciences bring under their sway, or however detailed the accounts of historians, so much is left out at the individual personal level. Im speaking here about the views, feelings, reactions, impulses, and beliefs of flesh-and-blood human beings, as well as their distinctive characters and life patterns. I'm also referring to a mood, a culture, a social class, a period of recent history.
This book, uncaptured by politics or ideology, depicts the truth about what so many kids and families in this country experience. It does so without veneer or apology.
Accurately conveying the outlook of a social milieu or an individual person requires a more direct experience of life, along with sympathy, interest, and imagination, than the abstract and regimented methods of academic scholars and scientists allow.
Each way of understanding the worldthe abstract and the personalhas its place.
Still, much of this book indirectly reflects my suspicion of attempts to simplify, or reduce to artificially abstract terms, what the British philosopher Isaiah Berlin has described as the dark mass of factors that make up human existence.Not all of the complexities of human life can be flattened into neat categories.
Throughout my book, you'll learn about childhood instability, violence, addiction, social class, elites, and more. Not through experts telling you what to think, but through me recounting my experiences. Readers can see for themselves how my worldview arose from the events of my life. Composing the "common-sense" picture of the world from the perspectives of my younger self and my companions, proved more challenging than I anticipated. I was relieved to discover that I managed to capture something of the human experience; early readers tell me theyve felt a physical sensation upon reading the immediately recognizable experiences I describe.
"Troubleddisturbs, fascinates and educates. Through vivid and compelling storytelling, Rob Henderson shows how early trauma can set us on a destructive path. But Henderson didnt give up on himself, and you wont give up on him. I could not put this book down, even when I wanted to, and was left enriched by its life lessons and trenchant social insights. If you likedHillbilly ElegyorEducated, youll loveTroubled."
"Troubleddisturbs, fascinates and educates. Through vivid and compelling storytelling, Rob Henderson shows how early trauma can set us on a destructive path. But Henderson didnt give up on himself, and you wont give up on him. I could not put this book down, even when I wanted to, and was left enriched by its life lessons and trenchant social insights. If you likedHillbilly ElegyorEducated, youll loveTroubled."
Carole Hooven, author ofT: The Story of Testosterone, the Hormone that Dominates and Divides Us
Pre-Order My Book
Pre-Order My Book
Chapter Four
Months passed, and life settled down. We moved out of the duplex and into a house, where Shelly now lived with Mom, Hannah, and me. At this point, at ten years old, I was a latchkey kidI walked to school in the mornings, and when I walked home, Mom and Shelly would still be at work. Shelly usually made dinner, and Hannah and I did the dishes. Though my environment had stabilized, the quiet disdain I felt for grown-ups lingered and flared when they tried to get me to do anything school related. As far as I was concerned, adults were unreliable liars. With each new family, new parent, and new rejection, grief, anger, and loneliness accrued within me.
My grades were plummeting, so my teacher called Mom in for a parent-teacher conference. The teacher explained that I hadnt turned in any homework that week. Mom was livid. She and the teacher marched to my classroom desk and opened it. All three of us looked at the large stack of uncompleted assignments. Moms eyes widened.
What is this, Rob? Mom asked, pointing at the unfinished schoolwork in my desk.
I shrugged. I dunno.
Youre going to do all of these assignments when we get home and hand them in to your teacher here when youre finished.
When we got home, Mom tossed the assignments on my bed and told me to get to work.
I looked at the pile of papers.
No fucking way, I thought. After she left the room, I scooped up the pile of papers in my arms, walked outside, and dumped them into the curbside garbage bin. The weather was too nice to be doing homework anyway, I thought. I remained on the driveway for a few more seconds, seeing how long my callused bare feet could withstand the heat of the asphalt.
, I thought. After she left the room, I scooped up the pile of papers in my arms, walked outside, and dumped them into the curbside garbage bin. The weather was too nice to be doing homework anyway, I thought. I remained on the driveway for a few more seconds, seeing how long my callused bare feet could withstand the heat of the asphalt.
I grabbed some shoes and decided to walk to my friend Edgars house. He was twelve years old now, and to me, practically an adult. He and his younger brother Enrique lived with their mom, who raised them alone.As far as I could tell, theyd never met their dad. By this point, Edgar had gotten in trouble a couple of times for stealing cars, and often got cigarettes or weed from his older cousins.
I knocked on Edgars door. Whats up, man.
Yo, Edgar replied, stepping outside. He flicked a lighter. I have one left. He pulled out a joint from behind his ear.
Lets go.
We walked to a field nearby and started smoking weed. On the
ground near some bushes, I saw a pack of Camel Lights.
Probably empty, I said, walking over and opening it. To my surprise, it was completely full.
No way, Edgar said. Someone must have left it? Fell out of a purse? Sweet.
We smoked the joint and as many cigarettes as we could until we started feeling sick. We joked about how the police officer who taught our DARE class would show us pictures of people on drugs. He said if we did drugs, then we would look like those people with sunken-in cheeks, bad skin, and missing teeth. But wed been smoking weed and cigarettes for about three months now and nothing happened to us. More evidence that adults were liars.
I told Edgar about Mom discovering my unfinished assignments.
Dude, she said I had to do all of it.
That sucks, he replied. So, what are you going to do?
I already threw it all in the trash.
We high-fived and laughed.
My stomach was hurting from the cigarettes. Lets go to Bethanys house. Maybe shes home now. Bethany was a girl in our class who we hung out with sometimes.
Buzzed from weed and nicotine, we walked to Bethanys. I rang the doorbell.
Dude, look. Edgar was snickering, flicking his lighter next to the eight-foot thicket by the porch. The pine needles crackled as he held the flame under them.
I tried to suppress a grin.Are you retarded? Theyre going to see
Suddenly the door opened. It was Bethanys mom. I glanced next to me, relieved to see Edgar with his hands in his pockets.
Hi, um, is Bethany here? I asked.
Shes staying at her dads this week, boysOH MY GOD! The entire thicket was on fire. Pine needles were popping. The flame was spreading fast. Bethanys mom pointed us to the garden hose and called the fire department.
They arrived quickly. Fortunately, no one was hurt, and the only damage was to the shrubbery. One of the firefighters took Edgar and me aside. We insisted we didnt start the fire. He didnt believe us, but he didnt call our parents either.
If we find you boys near any more fires, he said firmly, were going to contact your parents.
I ran home.
Smoking a joint and a bunch of cigarettes, nearly burning down my friends house, and pretending to be innocent was taking its toll. My stomachache was intense. I opened the garbage bin in front of our house and puked all over my unfinished homework. Then I went inside, drank a glass of chocolate milk, and fell asleep.
I didnt get caught for the fire, but I was still getting into trouble at school. Id disrupt class often and make a lot of jokes, which Edgar and the other kids found funny. Their laughter encouraged me to keep it up. My teacher would get irritated, and eventually he put a desk outside in the hall and told me to sit out there. He sometimes told me that I had potential, and that I could succeed if only I applied myself. But I didnt even know what that meant. I didnt know that it meant to try harder. Even if I had, I wouldnt have done it anyway.
One day in class, the teacher told everyone that our assignment was to read (or try to memorize) a short poem, recite it in front of the class at the end of the week, and give our interpretation of what it meant. Because I enjoyed reading so much, I actually took this assignment seriously.
I chose a poem called Twistable Turnable Man by Shel Silverstein. It was in a book I found in the library after school. When I told the teacher, he told me to try something shorter and easier. I liked this poem a lot, though, so I chose it anyway. It began:
Hes the Twistable Turnable Squeezable Pullable Stretchable Foldable Man.
The poem described how the man could twist and turn and adapt to anything. I liked the way it sounded, and the way the rhyme and rhythm added to the mental image of this person who could seamlessly transform over and over. Throughout the week, I read it over and over and committed it to memory.The morning we were supposed to present to class, I took a big gel coloring pen from the girl sitting next to me. I held it above some kids head and broke it in half, covering him in shiny blue ink. Everyone except the teacher laughed.
While everyone presented their poems, I sat sullenly at the desk outside and didnt get to share the poem with the class.
Mom had just finished scolding me about the gel pen incident. After she left the room, Shelly came in to talk to me. She had become a surrogate parent. Mom wasnt always forthcoming because she thought I wasnt old enough to understand everything that had happened to me. Shelly was more candid.
I asked her why Dad, whom I now called Gary, didnt want to see me anymore. Shelly explained that sometimes adults did things without understanding how their decisions affect kids. I told Shelly that I wasnt affected by anything and didnt care, but she wasnt buying it.
A lot of this will affect you in ways you dont understand yet, Rob, Shelly said. But youre a smart kid. Later, youll understand.
I rolled my eyes. I didnt want to believe her.
Since Shelly entered the picture, Id learned more about her. Shed been married to a man and had three daughters.After she had started a family, she earned a college degree by taking night classes. Her daughters were now teenagers.The middle daughter lived in Alaska somewhere with her baby.The other two lived with their father; the oldest was a single mom and the youngest had just started high school. Neither of the two eldest girls was in touch with the father of her child.
Wait, I said when she told me this. Does that mean youre a grandma? I asked.
Well, I do have two grandbabies, she replied.
I thought grandmas were supposed to be old, I said.
Ill take that as a compliment, she said, glancing at Mom, who was walking past in the hallway and pretending she wasnt listening in.
Will I get to meet your kids? I asked. Yes, at some point.
Are they my sisters now?Then I thought about my relation-ship to their kids. Am I an uncle? I asked.
Shelly smiled warmly, and said,Were all family now.
Id been in so many families by this point that I began to wonder how much longer this one would last.
At the request of the State of California, I started seeing a child therapist once a week. Mom explained that because of my experiences in foster care, the divorce, and all Id been through, she and my social worker, Karen, agreed that it would be a good idea for me to talk to someone.
At first, I thought it was dumb. Id always hated talking to doctors and shrinks. Why would it help me to talk to yet another state-appointed adult? How many of these people had I talked to already? At least four or five, maybe more.
Mom then explained that the therapists office was in Chico, a forty-five-minute drive from Red Bluff. That meant I got to leave school early every Tuesdayand suddenly I agreed it was a good idea for me to go.
The therapist introduced herself as Janet, which took some getting used to. I viewed her the same way I viewed my teachersa non-parental authority figureso I felt I should call her Ms. So-and-So.
She was a kind, middle-aged white lady with thick glasses. During our first session, I looked around and saw board games everywhere.
Why do you have those? I asked.
For people who visit. Sometimes we play games while we talk, she replied.
So, we can play? I asked.
She encouraged me to pick whatever game I wanted. I chose Guess Who?, a game where each player picks a card with a person on it and then asks identifying questions before guessing who the other player has.
At first, we just played. Actually, during the first couple of sessions all I did was choose games for us to play. There was some small talk, but it wouldnt get too personal.
Whats new at school? Janet asked during our third session. Just the same stuff. Its pretty boring, Id say.
What about Red Bluff, do you like it there? she asked. Its okay. Theres some crazy stuff that happens sometimes.
Like what?
Like last year this cop would sometimes teach our DARE class. We thought it was pretty dumb,drugs are bad blah blah blah. But he was funny, hed tell us some stories about what happens when people are drunk. But now hes dead, I said.
Oh dear, what happened? Janet asked, shuffling cards for Uno.
The teacher told us he was just, like, pumping gas into his cop car. Some dude came up behind him and shot him in the dome.
Dome?
His headthe guy shot him in the head.
What did you feel when you learned about that? Janet asked.
Its . . . I dont know. My eyes wandered, sneaking a glance at the clock. I wished this session would end.Its pretty messed up, you know? People are here, and then theyre gone.
Janet remained silent.
I shrugged. The teacher told us the guy who shot him was probably on drugs, or drunk, or whatever. She told the class it was sad, or, like, tragic, that he died so young.
That is terrible. Can you tell me a little more about what you just said, Rob, about people being here and gone?
I dont know why I said that. I had a hunch about where she might go with this. I didnt want to have that conversation.
Whenever she asked me anything too personal, Id either ignore her or give short answers, and she wouldnt push.
After a few sessions, I felt more comfortable opening up. I told her about the fights Id gotten into in foster homes and at school in Red Bluff. She nodded and said there were many reasons why kids fight. But a possible reason in my case was that I moved a lot. Boys can be competitive, Janet explained, and sometimes when there is a newcomer, they want to test him. She said kids in poor families, and of course, foster kids, are more likely to move around and change schools a lot. This increases the odds of fights breaking out because boys constantly feel the need to reestablish the pecking order. At schools where everyone already knows everyone else, fights are less frequent.
One day, she asked me how I was getting along at home. Its fine, but Im still confused about something.
Okay, what is it? she asked.
I dont know. I dont understand people. Gary was my dad. Then he stopped talking to me. Mom was married to him, and now shes with Shelly. She liked guys, now she likes girls. None of it makes sense to me.
Janet said it was understandable that I was confused, and that adults get confused about things, too. She asked how I felt that Mom was gay.
I dont mind. Shelly is pretty nice. Shes a better cook than Mom and makes good food. Mom burns everything. Anyway,I get why girls would like girls, but dont get how boys can like boys. Thats also confusing, I said.
Why? Janet asked.
Because boys are gross.
Are the boys you know gross?
Yeah, I mean some of them. Girls arent as gross. Theres a boy in my class who farts all the time. We call him the stinky-cheese man.
Janet laughed.Where is that name from?
Its a character from a book my teacher read to us in class: The Stinky Cheese Man and Other Fairly Stupid Tales.
Janet raised her eyebrows. Interesting choice. What about the books your teacher assigns you, do you like them?
Yeah, some. I like the books I choose on my own more. The librarian at school is really nice. She taught me how to check out books. She said I could take up to ten! I cant even fit ten in my backpack. So, I usually get like four or five.
You know, Ive noticed my grandchildrens backpacks keep getting heavier. That cant be good for kids backs. How is school going overall?
Its pretty good. Mom and Shelly make sure Im doing home-work now. I wish I didnt have to do it, though. Mom said she could handle it if I got a C-minus but would be mad if I got lower than that.
I think youre capable of a lot higher than that, Rob. What about your friends, do they enjoy school?
Not really. My friend Jeremy down the street says his mom and stepdad give him a dollar for every good grade on his report cards, but I dont believe him. I go to their house sometimes, and they dont even have a real couch. It was just plastic patio chairs and stuff. The TV and VCR were sitting on the floor, plus his stepdad drinks a lot.
Janet nodded.What about sports, do you play any sports with your friends?
We play basketball and football. I keep asking if I can take Muay Thai classes. Theres a new gym that opened up in Red Bluff. I walked by it once and saw people hitting punching bags.
I thought if I said this to Janet, then maybe shed talk to Mom about it. I was about to tell her about the fire incident with Edgar, too, but then our time was up.
At eleven years old, I hated when Mom would treat me like I was a little kid. It was Saturday and I wanted to go stay the night at my friends house. It was a little after ten oclock. Mom said she didnt want me wandering around late at night but also didnt want to drive. Finally, when I promised her Id call her when I got to Johns house, she relented and let me go on my own.
Before leaving, I grabbed a Dr. Thunder soda from the fridge to drink on the way. I walked along the Antelope Boulevard Bridge over the Sacramento River. Up ahead, I saw a guy on a bicycle in the middle of the road, riding around in circles and trying to pop wheelies. He had a long goatee and tattoos across his arms and shoulders. He tried again to lift his handlebars and fell over on his bike. I glanced at him as I was walking by.
You got a problem? he asked, getting up and brushing himself off.
This guy was clearly high on something. His eyes were blood-shot and he looked stressed out. Now I was, too.
No, I said, heart racing in my chest. It was strange, I felt both terrified and alive. Even though I was scared, I enjoyed something about the rush. Maybe the fact that it temporarily distracted me from everything else.
He rode his bike in front of me to cut me off as I was walking, then said,Dont be talking shit to no motherfuckers around here!
Yeah, okay, I mumbled.
He got off his bicycle, and suddenly I remembered something Shelly had told me: in Red Bluff, grown men on bicycles usually had had their licenses taken away for committing crimes, because otherwise theyd be driving cars. Seeing this guy made me think she was probably right.
He stepped up to me.Did you say something: yes or no? What? I stammered.No, I didnt.
He looked down at my Dr.Thunder can and slapped it out of my hand. I quickly stepped back to avoid getting splashed.
Best not be talking shit. He got back on his bike and rode away.
I was afraid Id see this guy again. When I told my friend John about it, he said, If I was there I would have kicked his ass.
Yeah, I should have.
Actually, you should have pushed his ass over that bridge, John said.
Yeah, and then dropped his bike on him, too. I laughed, trying to act tough.
My middle school was pretty far from home, about a forty-five-minute walk. At least once a week I stopped by the local library in town and went straight to the biography section. Id flip through books about the lives of guys Id heard of, usually athletes. I watched a lot of WWF wrestling with my friend Sean, so when I came across a book calledThe Rock Saysby Dwayne The Rock Johnson, I sat down on the floor and read half the book before going to the librarian to check it out. Mom and Shelly got mad because I didnt get home until late in the evening, after dinner had already started. When I explained that I lost track of time because I was reading a book by The Rock, they were still irritated, but I overheard Shelly tell Mom in the kitchen it wasnt the worst excuse, and Mom seemed to agree.
My middle school was pretty far from home, about a forty-five-minute walk. At least once a week I stopped by the local library in town and went straight to the biography section. Id flip through books about the lives of guys Id heard of, usually athletes. I watched a lot of WWF wrestling with my friend Sean, so when I came across a book called
by Dwayne The Rock Johnson, I sat down on the floor and read half the book before going to the librarian to check it out. Mom and Shelly got mad because I didnt get home until late in the evening, after dinner had already started. When I explained that I lost track of time because I was reading a book by The Rock, they were still irritated, but I overheard Shelly tell Mom in the kitchen it wasnt the worst excuse, and Mom seemed to agree.
Id also been reading biographies of boxers and martial artists like Muhammad Ali, Rocky Marciano, and Bruce Lee. I rented the Martin Scorsese movie Raging Bull starring Robert De Niro and watched it multiple times.Then I went to the library to read the book it was based on, by the mid-twentieth-century boxer Jake LaMotta. These guys lived brutal livesLaMotta grew up in the Bronx,and his dad forced him to fight other children in the neighborhood, and adults tossed their loose change at them while they brawled. His dad would then take the coins for himself and leave nothing for his son. Reading these stories inspired me and made me a little more grateful that my life wasnt as bad as what some of them had gone through. Reading these books and watching TV shows like The Fresh Prince of Bel-Air or movies like 8 Mile, I discovered idols who were funny, confident, tough, and athletic.
I kept asking to enroll in the new boxing gym that had opened downtown. Mom and Shelly agreed it was a good idea, but said I had to pay for part of the monthly fee and for the equipment (like gloves, shin guards, and a mouthpiece). I mowed the lawn and did yardwork at our house for an allowance, pulling weeds, raking leaves, and cleaning the gutters. I didnt mindI was used to doing chores after living with the Martnez family. I did yardwork for some of Mom and Shellys friends. I spent several days shirtless with no sun-block digging ditches to help install a sprinkler system for one of the neighbors. I developed blisters all over and had to take Tylenol to relieve enough pain for me to sleep. I spent a couple nights at Cristians house and drank tequila while there to numb the pain.
The work paid off. I started going to Muay Thai classes five days a week for the summer, and sometimes on Saturdays when the coach would open the gym on weekends. I became obsessed with fitness and learning how to fight, but Mom and Shelly warned that if I got into any real fights, they wouldnt let me go anymore. That was fine with me. For the first few months, the coach simply drilled new students on proper form and technique. Then we moved on to practice on punching bags and focus mitts. Later, he paired us up and let us spar with each other. The gloves, mouthguards, and headgear didnt actually cushion the force of the blows as much as I expected. The first time I got punched stunned meit felt like any of the real punches Id taken. The instructor explained that box-ing gloves were actually invented to protect the hands of the per-son throwing punches more than the person receiving them. That added up, based on how badly I hurt my hand on Jamess forehead when I fought him in the bathroom back in fourth grade.
The instructor also stressed that if he found out we were start-ing trouble, hed kick us out of class. Echoing Mom and Shelly, he said we could punch each other in the gym but werent supposed to punch anyone outside of it. Around this time, I read a book by Chuck NorrisI want to say it was The Secret Power Within: Zen Solutions to Real Problems, but Im not entirely sure. He describes sitting in a bar and someone coming up to him, insulting him, and challenging him to a fight. Norris declines. Later, someone asks him why he didnt take the guy apart, and Norris replies that he didnt feel the need to prove himself to anyone. For me, this was a new and appealing ideabeing so strong that you dont feel the need to prove it. But, of course, he was Chuck Norris. Hed already established a reputation of being tough; most guys dont have that luxury.
This had become my new routine: Id wake up, go to school, go home, do homework, feed and walk our three dogsevery time Hannah and I saw a small dog looking for a home, we wanted to keep it. Mom and Shelly drew the limit at three. Anyway, for most evenings during the week, Id go to boxing class, then come home for dinner, and read a little before bed. I asked Mom and Shelly if I could get a punching bag, and they said Id have to earn my own money to buy one. So, I spent some time doing chores, trying to save up. That December, though, they surprised me with a high-quality Everlast punching bag for Christmas. Id punch that thing every night after dinner. I didnt wear wraps or gloves, so I grew calluses across my knuckles. My mood always lifted after spending twenty or thirty minutes hitting the bag.
Mom asked me how things were going with Janet. I said they were fine.
Your grades are good, hon. Youve been staying out of trouble, too. Im really proud of you. If you want, we can see about not visiting Janet anymore, but its up to you, Mom said.
I liked getting out of school early for our sessions, and after I talked to Janet, I felt better. But I always got nervous on the long car ride there. Thinking about upcoming appointments made my heart race. I didnt understand at the time, but the prospect of vulnerability, of revealing my fears and uncertainties, was terrifying. The idea of letting my guard down was scarier than actually doing so, at least within the context of therapy. It was sort of like hard workouts at the gym: I hated the feeling before,but usually felt better after. But with a gym routine you can see visible progress.This wasnt necessarily true with my sessions with Janet, and it made my choice clear.
I dont feel like I need to see her anymore, I said.
Seans mom and stepdad were going through a bitter separation, and he was always asking me to stay over on the weekends or asking if he could stay the night at my house.We were in his basement one Saturday night, close to midnight, playing Mario Kart and smoking weed. His older foster brother always had a supply for us. Sometimes wed have to buy it from him, and sometimes hed give it to us for free if he smoked with us. One time, when I was twelve and Sean was thirteen, his foster brother asked if we wanted to smoke some crystal with him, but the smell of meth was so bada combination of burnt plastic and body odor and urinethat I said no.
Sean took a long pull from the bong. I asked him if he knew why his parents had split up. Sean knew what I had gone through with the divorce in my family and said his situation was different. I took a hit off the bong, seeing how long I could hold it before I started coughing.
Then Sean explained that after Mom and Shelly had revealed that they were gay to his mom,Alice, Mom and Shelly then introduced Alice to a bunch of their friends.Alice hit it off with one of the women and decided to leave Seans stepdad, Jim, for her.Then Jim decided to move out, and Alices new partner began staying the night a lot. Later, Alice asked Jim if he could still pay the bills for the house and offered to have threesomes with him if he did. I started laughing.
Are you serious? I asked.
Not bullshitting you, man. Sean laughed too. This is whats happening. She told him he could even stay in the house, just in a different bedroom, but they could have threesomes once a week if he kept paying rent and shit, Sean said.
I doubled over laughing again. So, is he going to? I asked. I mean, your mom is kinda hot.
Shut the fuck up. Sean threw a Nintendo controller at me.
I managed to duck just in time, thanking my boxing lessons for my sharpened reflexes. Then I felt a stinging pain on my ear as Sean threw a second controller at me. It missed, but the cord whipped across my earlobe. I was about to find something to throw back when Seans sister came down.
Is there any weed left? she asked.
Seans older sister was fifteen, and I thought she was very pretty. I had no idea she smoked. She was dating a good-looking guy named Justin who had recently gotten his drivers license.We made jokes sometimes because he looked kind of like Justin Timberlake.
No, Sean said. Go away.
Were having more fun upstairs anyway, she said, referring to herself and some of the older foster kids living with them. We heard them playing Whats Luv? by Fat Joe in the room above us.
Sean and I walked upstairs after her, curious to see what she meant.As soon as I opened the door I was immediately alarmed. One of Seans foster sisters had her hands wrapped around Justins throat, pressing the bottoms of her palms on the sides of his neck on the carotid arteries, Justin turned red and slowly fell to the ground, unconscious. Then he woke up a few seconds later with a goofy smile on his face.
The choking game, Seans sister explained to us. Sean nodded knowingly.Whos next? she asked us.
I didnt mind the prospect of Seans sister putting her hands on me, so I volunteered. She told me to first take really fast and shallow breaths for about a minute.
Why? I asked.
It makes you light-headed, it helps to get a better buzz.
I took a few quick breaths and confidently said that I was ready, but really, I was worried about being choked out. Seans sister smiled and said Id be fine. She pressed her hands on my neck. I looked into her eyes, hearing Ashanti sing the chorus from the CD player, and went numb.
Suddenly I awoke on the sofa.
What the fuck was that? I asked. My body tingled. I felt light and euphoric.I blacked out?
You did, she said.
I shook my head. I felt like Id just time traveled.
But its not actually choking. I could still breathe, I said.
They explained that the choking was really just to slow breathing down, to reduce oxygen to the brain. It wasnt meant to cut off air completely.
I didnt quite prefer it to weed, but it was still a new kind of high, which I liked. Seans sister taught me that I could even do it to myself, if I wanted. We played the choking game every few weeks, and I taught my friends Cristian and John how to do it, too. None of our parents ever found out we were doing this.
That year, Id go into the backyard and read a book if the weather was nice. Then Mom and Shelly would come home and cook dinner while my sister and I set the table. Wed eat dinner together, and Mom and Shelly would ask, How was school today? or, What did you learn in school today? As a twelve-year-old, Id usually give sarcastic responses at first, but Id also try to think of something I actually learned.I always had second and third helpings, because I was trying to gain some muscle. Mom and Shelly got me a weightlifting set for my thirteenth birthday, and I used it every day. I was trying to get fit for boxing and didnt mind that girls seemed to notice results, too. In math class a girl had put her hand on my chest and said, Wow. I said thanks, wishing I could respond in kind.
On Wednesdays wed have family board game nights. I jokingly called them bored game nights. While the four of us played Monopoly, Shelly would take it as an opportunity to tell my sister and me about the importance of education. I rolled my eyes every single time.
At this point, I had internalized that college was only for really bright kids, like my friend Richard, who had gotten straight As since the fourth grade. He always did homework and turned every assignment in on time. This dude did the extra-credit assignments even though he never needed to. Richard would tell us he was doing them just in case. In case of what? Id wonder.Thatis the kind of person who is supposed to go to collegenot me. Most of the kids in my school were not bound for college, anyway. I enjoyed reading, and I liked school sometimes. But having to pay money to keep going to school as an adult was not something I was interested in. I never said any of this aloud because I knew Mom and Shelly really wanted me to go. I would just nod during the game, noticing that Mom, Hannah, and I were more concerned with holding on to cash, while Shelly bought up every property she could. She seemed to know a lot about money and would often take Mom to the casino with her.
At this point, I had internalized that college was only for really bright kids, like my friend Richard, who had gotten straight As since the fourth grade. He always did homework and turned every assignment in on time. This dude did the extra-credit assignments even though he never needed to. Richard would tell us he was doing them just in case. In case of what? Id wonder.
is the kind of person who is supposed to go to collegenot me. Most of the kids in my school were not bound for college, anyway. I enjoyed reading, and I liked school sometimes. But having to pay money to keep going to school as an adult was not something I was interested in. I never said any of this aloud because I knew Mom and Shelly really wanted me to go. I would just nod during the game, noticing that Mom, Hannah, and I were more concerned with holding on to cash, while Shelly bought up every property she could. She seemed to know a lot about money and would often take Mom to the casino with her.
After playing board games, we watched TV together as a family, usually American Idol or Friends. Shelly would fall asleep first, then Mom. Hannah and I would stifle our laughter when we heard them snoring and would turn the volume down while we kept watching.
After one night of bored games and TV, I eavesdropped on Mom and Shelly as they were getting ready for bed.
I made a lot of mistakes, Shelly said.Rob and Hannah dont know how good they have it.
Listening in wasnt that difficult. Their bedroom was right next to mine, the walls were thin, and they probably thought I was sleeping because it was after eleven oclock on a school night.
That was just weird, Shelly, Mom said.
Listening closer, I gathered that they had visited Shellys old house, where her ex-husband and two daughters still lived. Id been curious about Shellys kids, and the fact that she, just like Mom, had a husband before coming out as gay.
We just walked in, Mom said in an aggravated tone,picked up your mail, never said hello to anyone, and left. Your daughters were there, and they didnt say anything to you.
Thats just how we are right now, Shelly said.
She explained that things hadnt been the same since she left them a few years ago. She and her ex were on good terms, but her relationship with her daughters was tense. I figured this must be why I hadnt met them in the four years since she and Mom got together. I wondered if Hannah could also hear this conversation. Her room wasnt much farther away than mine.
You have grandkids, Mom said, the volume of her voice slightly rising.And none of us has ever met them.
You will, Shelly replied.
I wondered when that might be.
One night a few months later, the three of us (Hannah was with her dad) were eating dinner together, when the phone rang and Shelly picked it up. After listening for a few seconds, she leapt up and raced to her and Moms bedroom and slammed the door. Mom followed after her. I sat alone, eating and wondering what was going on. Mom came out and told me we were going to the hospital, but she wouldnt explain why. I helped her quickly put the leftover food in the fridgewe couldnt afford to let it spoiland we got in the car and left.
It was a school night, so I figured whatever this was, it must be serious. Still, I was annoyed that no one was telling me what was happening. I turned on my Walkman that Id gotten for my birthday and listened to the Get Rich or Die Tryin soundtrack by 50 Cent. One of my class-mates had burned the CD and sold it to me for five bucks.
As soon as we stepped foot in the hospital, Shelly started speed-walking. Mom and I trailed closely behind.
When is someone going to explain whats going on? I asked.
Well tell you later, Mom said.
In the waiting room, I sat in one of the chairs. I listened to my music and looked around.A young woman with dark blond hair, lots of makeup, and a small tattoo on her right arm joined Mom and Shelly, who were standing and pacing nervously. The woman had a toddler with her, and Shelly gave a big smile to the little girl, pick-ing her up and hugging her. I looked at the woman with her kid, and at Mom. Both made awkward small talk. Suddenly I realized: this woman was Shellys daughter. They had the same hair color and facial features and were about the same height.
Hours passed, and during that time Shelly officially introduced me to her daughter, Katrina, whose kid was asleep in one of the waiting room chairs. I got up to take a long walk around the hospital and stop by the vending machines, where I got a Snickers and a Coke for myself, and a coffee for Mom, who looked exhausted.
I was about twenty feet from the waiting room on my way back when I saw a young-looking guy, maybe seventeen or eighteen years old, slowly approach Mom and Shelly. He had big arms and a backward visor on his head. Shelly got up from her chair abruptly and shoved her finger into the guys face and started yelling at him. You fucking idiot! she yelled. How could you be so stupid?
I stopped and tried to listen. Embarrassed, Mom steered Shelly and this guy outside to continue their altercation. I continued walk-ing and gave Mom the coffee.
Whos that guy? I asked.
Mom took a deep breath. Shellys youngest daughter had a serious . . . incident. Were here to visit her. Thats her daughters boyfriend. Or ex-boyfriend, or something. She glanced outside.
Mom took another breath. JanineShellys youngest daughter had a miscarriage.
Id heard of this before; one of the eighth graders at school had had a miscarriage and had to take time off from school.
Mom continued,They found Janine in their bathroom and the floor was all covered in blood. They rushed her here.
So far they say she will be, Mom said. Dont worry about school tomorrow. Its going to be a long night.
Mom fell asleep a few minutes later. I put my candy bar and soda on the table. Katrina looked over and asked if she could have them to give to her daughter. I said sure. She unwrapped the Snickers, and I asked if her kid was skipping school tomorrow, too.
Natalie? Oh no, Katrina said. Shes still too young. Im the one who is supposed to be in school.
What grade are you in? I asked.
Im not sure, actually. Im supposed to be a senior, but I guess if I went back, Id technically be a junior to finish up my classes from the year before. She poured some Coke in a sippy cup and handed it to Natalie.
Thanks again, she said.
So, this is Shellys family, I thought. At least they have their mom now, and their dad is still around. I thought her daughters were lucky.
So how much did you find? Katrina asked.
Uh, hang on. I put all the coins on the table and counted them up again. Ninety-three cents.
Okay, I have two dollars and some change; this should be enough, Katrina replied.
Katrina and her three-year-old Natalie had moved in with us shortly after Shellys other daughter Janine had been hospitalized. Katrina and Shelly had been estranged, but at the hospital they re-connected. I overheard Katrina describe to Shelly how her ex had put a gun to her head and said he wasnt going to send money for Natalie anymore. Shelly decided shed be staying with us now.
Katrina had an old car and sometimes gave me a ride when I needed to go somewhere. We were usually strapped for cash, and it was tough to get enough together for gas. Id search between sofa cushions or collect some soda cans to turn in at the recycling center. Sometimes Id gather up to seven or eight bucks, but often Id have less than a dollar. We were embarrassed about how little we had when we went to the gas station. So, what wed do is buy something cheap, like a Slim Jim or a can of root beer, and ask the gas station clerk to put the rest on the pump. Then, we thought, it would look like we were just topping off before a long trip.
Katrina pulled into the Arco. I went inside with a little over three dollars, mostly in change, and did our thing with a small soda.
Katrina dropped me off at Muay Thai class.
Thanks, Ill see if I can get a ride home after, I said.
The coach knew I couldnt always afford the monthly fee, but he gave me a break, saying it was because Id grown up in LA, just like him. But really it was because I gave it my best in the gym. Sometimes he gave me a steep discount, and other times hed let me make it up by helping to clean up the gym or assist with teaching classes. I taught the childrens class and the novice adult classes, where I enjoyed repeating the lessons I learned from the coach (Dont block punches with your head). I also visited my coachs house to do yardwork sometimes on the weekendscutting grass, digging up old tree stumps, raking leaves. I had grown to enjoy it because I thought of it as a good workout.
I met a lot of people at the boxing gymincluding an elderly guidance counselor named Joe who worked at the main high school in town. He saw how hard I worked at the gym and how I would stay after to help clean up. Our coach sometimes paired us up to spar, and I was surprised by how hard he could hit for an old man. After classes, Joe and I talked about Arnold Schwarzenegger movies (the Governator was campaigning for election at this point), and Joe would tell me stories about how he was in the army before attending college.
I asked if the army made him tough, and he said it probably helped. I asked if he had to do a lot of push-ups, and he said theyd do knuckle push-ups on gravel. I looked at the calluses on my knuckles and figured I could probably handle that if I had to.
One evening after class, Old Joe stayed late, too, helping me sweep up the floors and wipe down the equipment. I was going to ask the coach for a ride home, but Joe said he could give me a lift. Thats when he noticed the books Id brought with me.
What are you reading there? Joe asked as I picked up my backpack.
The Tao of Jeet Kune Do by Bruce Lee, I said. I watched a movie about him on TV a few months ago.
Bruce Lee had a fascinating way of thinking about things, he replied.
We talked about Lees idea of being like water, which we both thought meant to be formless and flexible both mentally and physically. The idea, we thought, was to be prepared for anything.
Thats great that youre reading about him, Old Joe said. When do you start high school? he asked.
Next school year, I responded. So, this fall.
Any plans for what you want to do after? he asked.I know youre young, but youll have to think about grades and other considerations, depending on what youd like to do.
I dont really know. College sounds hard, and I know we dont have the money for it.
Old Joe nodded while he drove. Well, there are scholarships and other options.Again, depending on grades and so forth.
I hated talking about college. Maybe the military,I said.But I havent thought much about it.
The military can be a good option for young men; the wars in Iraq and Afghanistan notwithstanding. I have a feeling, Rob, youre going to do well no matter where you end up, Old Joe said.
No one had ever said anything like this to me before. Old Joe saw the effort Id put in at the gym. He knew I couldnt afford the fees but worked to stay enrolled in classes. Id heard from teachers that I could do well if I applied myself, but no one had said that no matter what, Id be okay. It made me feel something I rarely felt before: pride. His praise felt earned.
It wasnt his place to tell them, Mom said.
I overheard Shelly and Mom having a heated conversation about Hannahs dad, Gary. Mom had been thinking about how to tell Grandma and Grandpa about her relationship with Shelly. Mom was stressed about this because she wasnt sure how they would react. But then the choice about when and how to tell them vanished because Gary had written them a letter instead. In the letter, he told them that it was Moms choice to leave him, and that she had entered a relationship with a woman. Mom was furious, but also said she was slightly relieved because she had been dreading breaking the news herself.
Weeks later, Mom, Shelly, Hannah, and I all visited my grandparents house together.The first few minutes after we arrived, there was a peculiar silence as we sat around the living room. Everyone was polite and spoke quietly.
Grandma and Grandpa then told Mom that they disagreed with her lifestyle but would always love her.They said that Shelly was now part of the family. I looked at Shelly and Mom, and both were teary-eyed. My moms brothersmy uncles, who I usually saw only once a year for the holidayswere there, too, and said something similar. If our sister loves you, then we love you, too, they said. Just like with Rob here. She picked him, though were not entirely sure why, one of my uncles teased. I was grateful someone made a joke to lift the mood, and then tried to take him to the ground to wrestle, but he was too strong from his years working as a logger. I could barely move him. Mom laughed and then cried for a while after that. Shelly cried, too, which Id never seen her do.
I was about to finish eighth grade. Meanwhile, Shelly had gotten a promotion in her job at an assisted-living facility for the developmentally disabled, and we moved into a bigger house.We needed the extra space because we had more people living with us now. Janine had gotten pregnant again by the same guy Shelly had yelled at after her miscarriage. At sixteen years old, she gave birth to a daughter. By this point, Shellys other daughter, Katrina, had moved out. So now Janine and her baby were living in the house with me, Mom, Shelly, and Hannah.
A few months later, Moms cousin, Aunt B, along with her young daughter, moved in with us, too.Aunt B was having some trouble with her husband, who drank a lot and broke things. She said she had been able to deal with it until he started shouting insults at their daughter. Mom once explained to me that Aunt Bs father was a logger and had been killed in a logging accident when a large limb had snapped and fallen on his neck. Aunt B was devastated, and ever since then had had difficulties with drinking and choosing men.
When she lived with us,Aunt B would sit on the front porch, smoking cigarettes and cracking wise about people in the neighborhood or what shed recently watched on television.
I sat with her one evening before family dinner.
Hows life, Rob? she asked.
Its good, I guess.
Getting excited for graduation?
My middle school was holding a small graduation ceremony.
No, I dont have my cap and gown yet, I said.
Well, why not? Aunt B took a long drag from her cigarette.
They cost fifteen bucks. I dont want to ask for it. Maybe I can skip the ceremony.
Money was tight, and I knew having extra people living with us wasnt helping things.
No, youre going to that ceremony, kiddo. Your mom wont shut up about how well youve been doing in school. Meanwhile, Im over here giving everyone a headache.
She pulled out her purse and handed me the cash.Thisll make me square with your mom, I think. She lit another cigarette.
Thanks, Aunt B, I said. This was a huge relief. I didnt want to have to make up a reason to my friends about why I couldnt go to the ceremony.
Can I have a cigarette, too? I asked.
I just gave you fifteen bucks. Go get your own.
We laughed together. Aunt B coughed and then said, Okay then. Lets get some dinner.
I was outside shooting hoops one summer day between eighth grade and high school, happy about how my life had improved. Under the advice of Old Joe, Id taken some initiative.
A few months earlier, I was walking home from school and saw a bunch of guys outside of a neighbors house doing construction.Some of them were carrying Sheetrock, tools, and other equipment. I saw that their trucks were dirty from all the dust around. I asked if I could wash their cars for six dollars each.They looked at each other and shrugged, Why not. I did a good enough job that some of them hired me later to stack wood for the upcoming winter. I also raked leaves, cleaned gutters, and helped them haul heaps of garbage and old appliances to the local landfill. I made a few hundred bucks that summer. I started to understand that there were reliable connections between good choices and good outcomes and bad choices and bad outcomes. It had taken a long time for me to internalize these connections because outcomes were so often delayed.
Mom and Shelly bought some lumber from these guys when they learned that heating a house with firewood was less expensive than central heating. They wanted me to wake up at five-thirty every morning to build a fire so that the house would be warm by the time Mom and Shelly got up to get ready for work at seven.
At first, I argued with them about my new chore. Shelly sat next to me and replied that she and Mom worked all day to pay the bills, and it was the least I could do as the man of the house. I couldnt argue with that. Id always thought of chores as something imposed on me, like a punishment or something. Now, I became aware that I had an important role in the family and household. Shelly told me I was getting older, and that it was time for me to take some more responsibility. She treated me like an adult, which I found both gratifying and annoying. I did this all winter, when temperatures would dip into the low thirtiesfrosty weather for Californians.
So, Id wake up bleary-eyed and think to myself that my relationship with fire sure had changed since the episode with Edgar a few years ago. One time I got up at half past five, barely conscious, and built a fire. Then I walked into the bathroom, thinking about what school assignments I had due that day, and I realized it was Saturday. I groaned as I brushed my teeth, then put out the fire and went back to bed.
With the money Id made, I paid Coach Bill the debt I owed him for boxing lessons and still had some cash left over to buy a portable outdoor basketball hoop from Walmart. I set it up in the driveway.
I dribbled away.
The house was emptyMom and Shelly had gone somewhere with their friends that afternoon, and Hannah was at her dads. Aunt B and Shellys daughters were out, too. Mom and Shelly had invited me to tag along with them, but I said no way. I loved being home alone. It was tranquil, the opposite of chaos. I basked in the calm of the afternoon, shooting hoops and drinking lots of iced tea Shelly had made the day before.
When the phone rang inside, I ignored it, figuring whoever it was could just leave a message on the machine. But it kept ringing and wouldnt stop. I walked into the kitchen and wiped my fore-head while I picked up the phone.
Hello, I said.
Rob. It was Mom. It sounded like she was stifling laughter. Shelly was in an accident.
What? I asked. Then why are you laughing?
Listen, hon, she said.
I could tell she was having trouble breathing, then I realized she was crying, not laughing.
Mom paused and then said: Shelly was shot.
Please write a short review/reaction andpost it here on this form. Or, if you prefer, you can also email me your review (rob@robkhenderson.com).
Please write a short review/reaction and
. Or, if you prefer, you can also email me your review (rob@robkhenderson.com).
If at least 50 readers send their reviews, then Ill continue to share additional chapters ofTroubledwith you here on my Substack.
Comments
Restacks
Sarah
Sarah
Onward and Repeat
Onward and Repeat
Onward and Repeat
Oct 24, 2023
Great chapter.  The anecdote about almost doing meth and the run-in with the intoxicated man on the bike illustrate how easily a life trajectory can change.  It can be easy when we see a successful person who had a tumultuous childhood to use phrases like: " well they made you who you are today."
Great chapter.  The anecdote about almost doing meth and the run-in with the intoxicated man on the bike illustrate how easily a life trajectory can change.  It can be easy when we see a successful person who had a tumultuous childhood to use phrases like: " well they made you who you are today."
I don't know if it's trying to help the other person or ourselves or both.  I think it makes sense for a person to grab onto what gains they may have made as a result of their own trials.  But for others to say essentially "look how great you're doing now, probably because of how bad you had it" seems an oversimplication and too close to a justification for suffering in which only hindsight tells us it will all work out in the end.  After all, if meth had smelled better, or that man had been more anxious for a fight, who knows?
I don't know if it's trying to help the other person or ourselves or both.  I think it makes sense for a person to grab onto what gains they may have made as a result of their own trials.  But for others to say essentially "look how great you're doing now, probably because of how bad you had it" seems an oversimplication and too close to a justification for suffering in which only hindsight tells us it will all work out in the end.  After all, if meth had smelled better, or that man had been more anxious for a fight, who knows?
Like (4)
Reply
Share
Tom Grey
Tom Grey
Toms FI News
Toms FI News
Toms FI News
Oct 25, 2023
Oh man, so real, personal, honest, sad. With a known, fairly happy ending of this first part, yet with still unknown tragedies and drama to come.
Oh man, so real, personal, honest, sad. With a known, fairly happy ending of this first part, yet with still unknown tragedies and drama to come.
Getting the motivation to do the actions which lead to self respect. How? Its mostly personal.
Getting the motivation to do the actions which lead to self respect. How? Its mostly personal.
Thanks for all four, too short chapters, so far.
Thanks for all four, too short chapters, so far.
Like (2)
Reply
Share
Top
Latest
Discussions

Rob Henderson

Rob Henderson

Rob Henderson

Rob Henderson

Rob Henderson

Rob Henderson

Rob Henderson

Rob Henderson

Rob Henderson

Rob Henderson


undefined subscriptions will be displayed on your profile (edit)
Skip for now
For your security, we need to re-authenticate you.
Click the link we sent to sasha.p.podolsky@gmail.com, orclick here to sign in.
Info
Shopping








0:00/4:03

0:00
/
4:03


