

1
Book meeting
Book a meeting
Subscribed
Share
Share
Give a gift subscription
Give a gift subscription
Below is a transcript, lightly edited, with highlights frommy conversationwith Jordan Peterson on The Jordan B. Peterson Podcast. We spoke about my bookTroubled, verbal intelligence, political correctness, social class, the young male syndrome, the importance of story and narrative, and much more. You may have to open this post in a separate tab, as Substack informs me that this post is too long for email.
Below is a transcript, lightly edited, with highlights from
with Jordan Peterson on The Jordan B. Peterson Podcast. We spoke about my book
, verbal intelligence, political correctness, social class, the young male syndrome, the importance of story and narrative, and much more. You may have to open this post in a separate tab, as Substack informs me that this post is too long for email.
Enjoy:
Jordan Peterson:Hello everybody. I'm talking today to Dr. Rob Henderson, who's a memoirst and a public intellectual, a psychologist, and author of the recent bookTroubled: A Memoir of Foster Care, Family, and Social Class. And we really talk about not so much his book exactlyalthough also thatbut Rob's experience growing up in the foster care system in the United States, in California, and his transformationsequential transformations of personality and status as he moved from the foster care systemvery fragmented and chaotic childhood upbringinginto the military, and then to Yale and to Cambridge. So, quite an upward arc.
Hello everybody. I'm talking today to Dr. Rob Henderson, who's a memoirst and a public intellectual, a psychologist, and author of the recent book
. And we really talk about not so much his book exactlyalthough also thatbut Rob's experience growing up in the foster care system in the United States, in California, and his transformationsequential transformations of personality and status as he moved from the foster care systemvery fragmented and chaotic childhood upbringinginto the military, and then to Yale and to Cambridge. So, quite an upward arc.
We review his book,Troubled, talking about his early experiences and concentrating as well on his developing ideas of family fragmentation and the manner in which that fragmentation has been aided and abetted by the same elites, essentially, that Rob studied with at Yale and Cambridge. He's the originator of the notion of "luxury beliefs, the idea that the elite classes, who are yammering constantly about privilege, have as one of the privileges theyre unwilling to discuss the privilege of adopting ideas that are very, very, very harmful to dispossessed people, especially those who are economically dispossessed. They have these ideas of unstable family structure, for example, that, when implemented in the real world, are absolutely catastrophic. And so we talk about that too.
We review his book,
, talking about his early experiences and concentrating as well on his developing ideas of family fragmentation and the manner in which that fragmentation has been aided and abetted by the same elites, essentially, that Rob studied with at Yale and Cambridge. He's the originator of the notion of "luxury beliefs, the idea that the elite classes, who are yammering constantly about privilege, have as one of the privileges theyre unwilling to discuss the privilege of adopting ideas that are very, very, very harmful to dispossessed people, especially those who are economically dispossessed. They have these ideas of unstable family structure, for example, that, when implemented in the real world, are absolutely catastrophic. And so we talk about that too.
I just reread your bookTroubled: A Memoir of Foster Care, Family, and Social Classlast week, and I found some topics that I'd really like to zero in on. But the first thing I'd like to know is, when exactly was your book published, and how is it doing?
I just reread your book
last week, and I found some topics that I'd really like to zero in on. But the first thing I'd like to know is, when exactly was your book published, and how is it doing?
Rob Henderson:It was published February 20th. So, as of this conversation, just a few days ago. It's doing well. It seems to be well received. A lot of my Substack subscribers are leaving positive feedback on Goodreads and on Amazon, and it's been reviewed in various outlets. So far, I've been happy with how things are going.
It was published February 20th. So, as of this conversation, just a few days ago. It's doing well. It seems to be well received. A lot of my Substack subscribers are leaving positive feedback on Goodreads and on Amazon, and it's been reviewed in various outlets. So far, I've been happy with how things are going.
I hit some strange obstacles on the way. Initially, my publisher and I thought we'd do some kind of a mini book tour, maybe visit some bookstores, do some book signings, and that ended up not going through, which was really disappointing for me. But fortunately, others have stepped in, and we've been able to do some events outside of the usual bookstore promo circuit.
Jordan Peterson:Okay, well, that was one of the things I wanted to ask you about because I saw some allusion to that, probably on X. So, why have you been unable to arrange a standard book tour in bookstores? I mean, you'd assume that, you know, bookstores would want to sell books, since that's what they do.
Okay, well, that was one of the things I wanted to ask you about because I saw some allusion to that, probably on X. So, why have you been unable to arrange a standard book tour in bookstores? I mean, you'd assume that, you know, bookstores would want to sell books, since that's what they do.
You know, I ran into trouble with booksellers with my books because they wouldwell, they certainly didnt promote them, and they often hid them. That was particularly true in Canada. Now, what effect that had is hard to say. It might have had a positive effect, all things considered, because it was publicized. But still, to call it appalling is to say almost nothing. Its this kind of underground shadow banning that seems to be a characteristic of our age.
Okay, so what exactly happened to you, and how do you explain it? Because, you know, youd think that your bookif your book had been published in the 60s, it would have been something like a clarion call to the left, right? Because you grew up under restricted circumstances, to say the least, and its a tale of you prevailing despite that. It isnt the sort of book that you would think would attract censorship attention. Youre not the guy to attract that attention fundamentally. So, why dont you walk me through that? Tell me what you make of it.
Rob Henderson:It was a surprise to me. I didnt think that my book was particularly controversial, but perhaps my sense of these thingsI dont know how much it can be trusted because the line is always moving constantly as far as whats acceptable versus unacceptable, and the line around political correctness and so forth.
It was a surprise to me. I didnt think that my book was particularly controversial, but perhaps my sense of these thingsI dont know how much it can be trusted because the line is always moving constantly as far as whats acceptable versus unacceptable, and the line around political correctness and so forth.
But I think the message in my book was perhaps to some degree unfashionable. I write in the book about the importance of responsibility, taking control of your life, of family. In the later chapters of the book, I discuss elite universities, the self-inflicted controversies at Yale and some of the other Ivy League schools. I describe luxury beliefs and point out some of the hypocrisy of the elites. And I think a lot of people who run bookstores didnt like that message very much. Its not a very trendy message to describe because I dont attribute a lot of the difficulties that my friends and I experienced growing up to systemic forces or to other fashionable sources.
Jordan Peterson:And so your diagnosis of the problem?
And so your diagnosis of the problem?
Rob Henderson:My diagnosis of the problemwell, I focus a lot on family and the deterioration of family. And thats not a topic that a lot of educated elites want to talk about. So thats one possibility for what was happening with the bookstores and why I got frozen out. The other is the association that I have, some of the endorsements. On the back of the book, I have endorsements from, you know, people like Nicholas Christakis, but also people like JD Vance. And theres a blurb from you as well, Dr. Peterson.
My diagnosis of the problemwell, I focus a lot on family and the deterioration of family. And thats not a topic that a lot of educated elites want to talk about. So thats one possibility for what was happening with the bookstores and why I got frozen out. The other is the association that I have, some of the endorsements. On the back of the book, I have endorsements from, you know, people like Nicholas Christakis, but also people like JD Vance. And theres a blurb from you as well, Dr. Peterson.
Jordan Peterson:Oh, thats funny.
Oh, thats funny.
Rob Henderson:Well, a friend of mine actually showed mehe was at a bookstore recently, and he showed me that theres a sticker, you know, theres the book, and then they have the sticker of the bookstore price with their logo. And there were two copies of my book, and it was your name, carefully covered with these stickers of the bookstore, just covering Jordan B. Peterson. And if it was one book, maybe a coincidence. But both books? I thought that was intentional. I think those two possible reasons are intertwined because you deliver this message as well about responsibility, family. I think you and I, you know, we discuss a lot of the same issues and a lot of the same social ills that are plaguing society.
Well, a friend of mine actually showed mehe was at a bookstore recently, and he showed me that theres a sticker, you know, theres the book, and then they have the sticker of the bookstore price with their logo. And there were two copies of my book, and it was your name, carefully covered with these stickers of the bookstore, just covering Jordan B. Peterson. And if it was one book, maybe a coincidence. But both books? I thought that was intentional. I think those two possible reasons are intertwined because you deliver this message as well about responsibility, family. I think you and I, you know, we discuss a lot of the same issues and a lot of the same social ills that are plaguing society.
And so the bookstore promo circuit was shocking to me because I thought that I would have been kind of the right person to do that. You know, there are big-name peoplecertain authors, if they were to do a book signing at a bookstore, it wouldnt work because theyre too famous and too well-known, and the store would just get overrun. And then, on the other hand, there are authors who dont have a lot of traction online, not a lot of presence in social media and so on, and they wouldnt be able to attract many people to come for a signing.
Whereas for someone like me, Ive done a few events now. Im out here in New York, and I can attract a hundred or a hundred and fifty people. And thats roughly the right kind of crowd you would want for a bookstore signing. And yet, they had no interest. But, you know, I would look at other authors who are doing bookstore signings, and theyeven if they dont have the same online presence as methey have messages that the legacy media really like. Theres that recent memoir about polyamory, of open marriages, and these bookstores love to host authors like that because theyre provocative and promote a certain agenda.
Jordan Peterson:Well, the funnyone of the things about your book is that its, in many ways, its not political. You know, I mean, my sense of your book was that you detailed out the consequence of having your family life fragmented, and the consequences you observed in the kids that you associated with of having their family lives fragmented. And most of what you said by doing so was implicit rather than explicit, right? You grounded the arguments in your lived experience, so to speak. I mean, thats not all you do, because, well, you also make reference to the relevant research literature. But its appalling, indeed, that youre not encouraged to tell your story, because its a very interesting story, and anyone with any sense would pay attention to it.
Well, the funnyone of the things about your book is that its, in many ways, its not political. You know, I mean, my sense of your book was that you detailed out the consequence of having your family life fragmented, and the consequences you observed in the kids that you associated with of having their family lives fragmented. And most of what you said by doing so was implicit rather than explicit, right? You grounded the arguments in your lived experience, so to speak. I mean, thats not all you do, because, well, you also make reference to the relevant research literature. But its appalling, indeed, that youre not encouraged to tell your story, because its a very interesting story, and anyone with any sense would pay attention to it.
Ill tell you part of the reason it struck me, but maybe what Ill let you do firstwhy dont you just tell everybody whos watching and listeningjust give them an outline of the books structure, so theyll have a better sense, if they havent read the book, of what were talking about. So, its an autobiography, but why dont you take it from the top and just walk people through it?
Rob Henderson:Right. Well, I wrote this memoir describing my very unusual trajectory into higher education and some of the lessons and observations I picked up along the way. I was born in Los Angeles into poverty. My mothershe was from Seoul. She came to the U.S. as a young woman to study. She became addicted to drugs and was unable to care for me. We were homeless for a time, then we lived in a car, and eventually, we settled in this slum apartment in LA. I never knew my father; my mother didnt know who he was either. So, I was in this apartment with my mothershe would tie me to a chair with a bathrobe belt while she got high. She would have visitors coming in and out of the apartment at all hours of the day and night, trading favors for drugs.
Right. Well, I wrote this memoir describing my very unusual trajectory into higher education and some of the lessons and observations I picked up along the way. I was born in Los Angeles into poverty. My mothershe was from Seoul. She came to the U.S. as a young woman to study. She became addicted to drugs and was unable to care for me. We were homeless for a time, then we lived in a car, and eventually, we settled in this slum apartment in LA. I never knew my father; my mother didnt know who he was either. So, I was in this apartment with my mothershe would tie me to a chair with a bathrobe belt while she got high. She would have visitors coming in and out of the apartment at all hours of the day and night, trading favors for drugs.
And by the way, I know all of this information because later I received this thick document full of information from social workers, forensic psychologists, and others who were involved in my case when I was in the foster care system in LA. I read these as an adult as I was writing the book to prepare.
So, my mother was very neglectful. Eventually, some neighbors called the policethey heard me crying and struggling to break free from this chair. The police arrived, and she was questioned by the police and later by forensic psychologists, asking, Whos Roberts father? Whats going on in this kids life? She didnt know who my father was either. She claimed that my fathers name was Robert, and thats who I was named after, but that was the extent of the information she could provide for them.
So, at age three, my mother was arrested. I was placed into the Los Angeles County foster care system and spent just shy of five years living in seven different homes all across LA.
Jordan Peterson:How old were you when that happened, when you were taken away from her?
How old were you when that happened, when you were taken away from her?
Rob Henderson:I was three years old. I spent the next five years in seven different foster homes in Los Angeles. Later, I did get some information about my birth father. I actually took a 23andMe genetic ancestry test last year. I went my whole life not knowing this, but Im half Hispanic on my fathers side. And, you know, I made this jokeI posted this on Xthat I wish I had known when I was applying to colleges. But, you know, a friend of mineI showed him the results, and he said, You went to bed white-adjacent, and you woke up as an underrepresented minority.
I was three years old. I spent the next five years in seven different foster homes in Los Angeles. Later, I did get some information about my birth father. I actually took a 23andMe genetic ancestry test last year. I went my whole life not knowing this, but Im half Hispanic on my fathers side. And, you know, I made this jokeI posted this on Xthat I wish I had known when I was applying to colleges. But, you know, a friend of mineI showed him the results, and he said, You went to bed white-adjacent, and you woke up as an underrepresented minority.
I lived in El Monte in the San Gabriel Valley. These are kind of rundown areas in Los Angeles. Some of these foster homes had upwards of eight to ten kids living in them. LA is one of the most overburdened foster systems in the U.S. in general, and its extremely stressed as a system. But LA, its especially bad. I remember some of these homeswed have four kids to a room, with two bunk bedstwo kids on the top bunk, two kids on the bottom. There were just so many children who need homes, and not very many foster parents available. The tacit agreement seems to be that as long as kids are being fed and arent actively being abused, its better for them to be in one of these homes than to be sleeping on the street, which is true. But the system is extremely disorderly, and its impossible to supply care for that many kids with a limited number of adults. So, I document these experiences in these homes.
It was difficult for me for a lot of reasons, but one reason was the level of uncertainty and instability. Not only would I not know how long I would be in any particular home, but sometimes Id enter a foster home and befriend some of the other kids there, and then they would be takenmaybe someone from their family of origin would re-enter the picture, and the kid would return to their aunt or mother or family member, or theyd go to another home. So, not only did I not know where I was going to be, but I also didnt know how much longer the kids around me would be there.
Eventually, after seven different homes in this cycle, I was adopted by this working-class family, and we settled in this kind of dusty town in northern California called Red Bluff, which is located in one of the poorest counties in the state. This was the late 90s. At the time, I wasnt aware of thisI was just, you know, I was a little kidbut in hindsight, having read a lot about class and family formation and whats occurring across the country, I got this front-row seat to witness firsthand the kind of family breakdown that scholars like Robert Putnam and Charles Murray and others have been documenting over the last few decades.
So, my adoptive parents divorced, and there was a lot of chaos, financial catastrophe, and dramanot just in my life with this adopted family, but in the lives of my close friends and those around me in this blue-collar town. I describe some of my friends experiences and their outcomes as well in the book.
Jordan Peterson:And then you closed the bookI mean, so, you end up in a family thats actually reasonably stable for some period of time, although it had its instabilities as well, its confused instabilities. But you go from there to the military, and you actuallythis is another reason why your book is contentious, maybebecause you actually have pretty positive things to say about your military experience, all things considered. I mean, I think you ran into its limitations for you after it had disciplined you to some degree, but you certainly do point out that for you, especially at that time in your life, the predictability and relative severity of disciplinethe predictable severity of disciplinewas actually very good for you. You found mentors and a pathway in the military that put you on a solid track that got you funneled to higher education. You might as well fill that part in too.
And then you closed the bookI mean, so, you end up in a family thats actually reasonably stable for some period of time, although it had its instabilities as well, its confused instabilities. But you go from there to the military, and you actuallythis is another reason why your book is contentious, maybebecause you actually have pretty positive things to say about your military experience, all things considered. I mean, I think you ran into its limitations for you after it had disciplined you to some degree, but you certainly do point out that for you, especially at that time in your life, the predictability and relative severity of disciplinethe predictable severity of disciplinewas actually very good for you. You found mentors and a pathway in the military that put you on a solid track that got you funneled to higher education. You might as well fill that part in too.
Rob Henderson:Enlisting in the first place was not the most well-thought-through decision. By the time I was 17, going through all of these experiences, I just knew that the path I was on was not the right path. I saw by this pointI was self-aware and reflective enoughthat I saw where my life was headed, where the lives of my friends were going.
Enlisting in the first place was not the most well-thought-through decision. By the time I was 17, going through all of these experiences, I just knew that the path I was on was not the right path. I saw by this pointI was self-aware and reflective enoughthat I saw where my life was headed, where the lives of my friends were going.
I had two jobs in high school: I worked as a dishwasher at an Italian restaurant, and then I was a bag boy at a grocery store. I had some older male co-workers in their early to mid-20s, and I would interact with them and hang out with them. On the one hand, I was 17, and I kind of thought these guys were cool because theyd buy beer and weed for my friends and me. They were just older, cool guys who had access to things that my friends and I couldnt access.
But I dideven at that timeI did think it was strange that some 25-year-old guy would want to hang out with a bunch of high schoolers and drink beer with us. I thought to myself, Is this what I want to be when Im 25? And, you know, that kind of carefree lifeliving weekend to weekendits fun when youre 17 or 18, but when youre 25, it just seemed a little pathetic.
So, I barely graduated high school. I had a C-minus average, a 2.2 GPA. I didnt know what my options were. Well, I knew my options as far as university were concerned were basically non-existent. But one of my male high school teachers pulled me aside one day, and heinitially, during the school year, he would sort of prod me and berate me and say, Why arent you doing your homework? Whats going on at home? And I would blow him off or backtalk. But then eventually, I think he kind of gave up that route and just started talking to me. We talked about sports or whatever television showswhatever was interesting to me.
One day, he showed me a picture of himself in an Air Force uniform on his computer. He pulled up this photo, and he basically said, This might be an option for you. He said, I can tell that youre not academically focused at the moment, but I can tell youre a smart kid, and this might be a good option for you. So, that was one of the things that planted the idea in my mind. There were others as well. I lived with my aunt and her brother my senior year of high school, and their father had also been in the Air Force, and he tossed that idea out to me. So, there were these kind of male figures in my lifenot quite role models, but just older male figures that I trusted.
At that time, I probably wasnt aware of this, but I was longing for that kind of guidance from some older male mentor or figurejust someone who could give me some advice on what I should be doing with my life. I didnt have a father. I had no male presence at home. So, the military became this option. I enlisted as soon as I graduated high school. I was still 17 years old. I had to have my adoptive mother sign ait was essentially a permission slipbecause I was still legally underage. I was the youngest guy in my military unit in basic training, and in hindsight, that was probably the best decision I ever made because it completely removed me from all of the bad influences of where I was growing up and all of the freedom that my friends and I had. I write about this experience. A friend of mine had been sentenced to prison, and when he got out, I met him. We met at a bar, had some beers, and were talking. We both came to the same conclusion around the benefits of limitations and constraints. I was telling him about my experiences in the military, basic training, and all this stuff, and he was telling me about the routine and the mundane, everyday structured life of prison. We both came to this conclusion that we hated it at first, but then, after a time, we grew to appreciate it for what it did for us, for providing these boundaries.
My friendit was funnyhe actually said that now that he was out, he sometimes missed it. He missed having that predictability, routine, and structure, which neither of us had growing up. So, the military did sort of contain my impulses, gave me structure, and channeled some of my aggressive and impulsive energy toward productive ends. In the book, I write about the "young male syndrome" and how the military finds ways to direct that toward something beneficial.
Jordan Peterson:Well, you know, the standard hypothesis for hard-headed criminologists with regards to incarceration is pretty blunt and straightforward. Of course, you know about the age-crime curve. I think criminality among men peaks at 19 and then precipitously drops off after 26. What prison does, in many ways, is segregate very badly socialized men until they mature. Now, it doesnt do an optimal job of that, but the standard penological doctrine isnt even rehabilitationits housing. Especially for the repeat offenders, its housing until theywell, they say burn out, but thats not really what happens. They dont burn out, they mature.
Well, you know, the standard hypothesis for hard-headed criminologists with regards to incarceration is pretty blunt and straightforward. Of course, you know about the age-crime curve. I think criminality among men peaks at 19 and then precipitously drops off after 26. What prison does, in many ways, is segregate very badly socialized men until they mature. Now, it doesnt do an optimal job of that, but the standard penological doctrine isnt even rehabilitationits housing. Especially for the repeat offenders, its housing until theywell, they say burn out, but thats not really what happens. They dont burn out, they mature.
And I think what happens if you grow up in a very chaotic environment, where theres very little attention paid to the future and everythings about the moment, is that theres no structure that facilitates cortical maturation, essentially. You can imagine that all those underlying competing motivational drivessex, power, aggression, the standard Freudian panoplythey have to be brought together under the rubric of some organizing structure. Thats essentially patriarchal; its essentially masculine. Freud talked about the inhibition of aggression and sexuality, but thats not a smart way of thinking about it. That was a major error on Freuds part because its not inhibition, its integration and maturation.
The cortex is an inhibitory organ, but more than anything, its an integrating organ. Part of the reason that you were crying out, I would say, in the book for guidance, is because you were looking for a story that represented a mode of beingthat is, in fact, the pathway to maturity. Heres a definition of maturity, Ill try this out on you, and you can tell me what you think about it.
The more immature you are, the more youre dominated by motivational and emotional drives, and they have a very short-term time horizon. The time horizon is basically now. So, if youre anxious, you want to stop being anxiousnow. If youre in an incentive-reward stateexcited and enthusiasticyou want gratificationnow. "Now" means whats pleasurable in the moment. What maturation means is what works for you in the widest variety of situations over the longest possible span of time. But it also means something else. It means whats good for you and everyone around you in multiple situations for the longest period of time.
The more immature you are, the more youre dominated by motivational and emotional drives, and they have a very short-term time horizon. The time horizon is basically now. So, if youre anxious, you want to stop being anxious
. If youre in an incentive-reward stateexcited and enthusiasticyou want gratification
. "Now" means whats pleasurable in the moment. What maturation means is what works for you in the widest variety of situations over the longest possible span of time. But it also means something else. It means whats good for you and everyone around you in multiple situations for the longest period of time.
Now, you need a certain amount of stability in your environment for an attitude like that to even pay off. But I dont think theres any difference between that expansion of the time frame, the integration of lower-order drives and emotions, and maturation. I think those are all the same thing. In a chaotic environment, like the one described in your memoir, youre left without a stable foundation. My sense has always been that a neurologically intact child only needs one good modelthats enough. You can derive that in various ways. You derived it partly from reading, but you pieced it together from the fragments of people you met as well. Zero role models, though, is a catastrophe. Part of the problem with fragmented families is that zero role models is frequently the case, and theres just nothing for a young person to grab on to.
Rob Henderson:Right.
Right.
Jordan Peterson:The other thing that struck me about your bookand there were many thingsbut one of the things that stuck with me was how schools are absolutely appalling, beyond comprehension, at helping young children plan. I built a program online calledFuture Authoringthat helps people plan. If you give that program to young men before they go to collegeespecially those who dont have a good academic backgroundand if they sit down and write a plan for 90 minutes, unsupervised, with no feedback, they are 50% less likely to drop out.
The other thing that struck me about your bookand there were many thingsbut one of the things that stuck with me was how schools are absolutely appalling, beyond comprehension, at helping young children plan. I built a program online called
that helps people plan. If you give that program to young men before they go to collegeespecially those who dont have a good academic backgroundand if they sit down and write a plan for 90 minutes, unsupervised, with no feedback, they are 50% less likely to drop out.
Rob Henderson:Wow.
Wow.
Jordan Peterson:No kidding. Fifty percent. Its insane. What that points to is the fact that no one ever sat them down and said, "Okay, kid, where do you want to be? You could be somewhere in five years. Thats the first thing to announce: You could take control of your life, and you could be somewhere in five years. If you could be there, where would it be?" I noticed in your book, when people did point that out to you, it was like a life raft for you. You make that point clear with the story about seeing the older guy in uniform. Its something, isnt it? Its some vision of at least a possible future, right?
No kidding. Fifty percent. Its insane. What that points to is the fact that no one ever sat them down and said, "Okay, kid, where do you want to be? You could be somewhere in five years. Thats the first thing to announce: You could take control of your life, and you could be somewhere in five years. If you could be there, where would it be?" I noticed in your book, when people did point that out to you, it was like a life raft for you. You make that point clear with the story about seeing the older guy in uniform. Its something, isnt it? Its some vision of at least a possible future, right?
Rob Henderson:It was fragmentarythrough books, pop culture, and some of the people around me. On the point about schools, I remember that I had some academic inclination. I was probably more oriented towards academics than my friends. But my academic performance was responsive to how stable my home life was. When there was stability at homepredictability and adults providing some oversightmy grades improved, and I started to become more focused on homework and tests. But inevitably, there were so many reversals and upheavals, and my grades responded to that as well.
It was fragmentarythrough books, pop culture, and some of the people around me. On the point about schools, I remember that I had some academic inclination. I was probably more oriented towards academics than my friends. But my academic performance was responsive to how stable my home life was. When there was stability at homepredictability and adults providing some oversightmy grades improved, and I started to become more focused on homework and tests. But inevitably, there were so many reversals and upheavals, and my grades responded to that as well.
By the time I reached high school, my grades were in the toilet. I did pretty well in middle school and got placed into advanced courses in high school. I was placed into chemistry, which was one of the advanced science courses. But, you know, this is where my head was at when I was 14 or 15 years old: The class was difficult, and I didnt want to put in the effort. I had no adults around me saying, You need to do this. You need to put in the effort. So, as an impulsive 15-year-old kid, I went to my guidance counselor and said, "I want to be put into the lower-level science course." He gave me this spiel about how it would throw off my academic trajectory. But then he handed me a paper and said, "If you can get someone to sign it, that's fine." So, I forged my moms signature and went into the lower-level science course, and that was that.
When youre a kid without much in the way of guidance or mentorship or role models, its very easy to make unwise decisions like that. And I did that repeatedly.
Jordan Peterson:The issue in that situation is quite clear. Why wouldnt you take the easy way out? Psychologists always have things backwards. They ask stupid questions like, Why do people take drugs? Thats a stupid question. The real question is, Why dont people take drugs all the time? You can get lab animals to self-administer cocaine non-stop under certain circumstances. So, the mystery of short-term motivation isnt a mystery. The mystery is, under what conditions might a young man be motivated to do something difficult, like take a chemistry course?
The issue in that situation is quite clear. Why wouldnt you take the easy way out? Psychologists always have things backwards. They ask stupid questions like, Why do people take drugs? Thats a stupid question. The real question is, Why dont people take drugs all the time? You can get lab animals to self-administer cocaine non-stop under certain circumstances. So, the mystery of short-term motivation isnt a mystery. The mystery is, under what conditions might a young man be motivated to do something difficult, like take a chemistry course?
Heres a question for you: Your grades varied with the stability of your environment, but Im wondering to what degree your grades varied with the attractiveness of the vision that you saw. When you got to the military and saw a career in front of you, for example, you buckled down and worked like mad. I know you also had stability there, but its not easy to discriminate between the conditions that enable people to thrive because theyre sacrificing toward something they clearly value versus being supported in a stable environment. What are your thoughts on that?
Rob Henderson:I like that distinction. Perhaps I was implicitly or unconsciously longing for that long-term vision, but in the moment, it didnt feel that way. I dont think many 17 or 18-year-olds are thinking far ahead into the future in a deliberate or intentional sense. For me, it was more about responding to the incentives of the moment. One of the things the military did, and what good parenting and mentorship do, is contain that energy so that, once the young person reaches the point where they can reflect and consider the future, you shepherd them to that point. Then they can think about their own future and what they want for their lives.
I like that distinction. Perhaps I was implicitly or unconsciously longing for that long-term vision, but in the moment, it didnt feel that way. I dont think many 17 or 18-year-olds are thinking far ahead into the future in a deliberate or intentional sense. For me, it was more about responding to the incentives of the moment. One of the things the military did, and what good parenting and mentorship do, is contain that energy so that, once the young person reaches the point where they can reflect and consider the future, you shepherd them to that point. Then they can think about their own future and what they want for their lives.
Jordan Peterson:Okay, well, so we could say that in a stable environmentmaybe this is a way of rectifying the two perspectives or reconciling themyou could say that in a stable, well-run household, the value of the future is implicit in the rituals of the household, right? Like, the household itselfthe reason we would regard it as well-run and stable is because it does take a long-term view. And so, your point isyeah, go ahead.
Okay, well, so we could say that in a stable environmentmaybe this is a way of rectifying the two perspectives or reconciling themyou could say that in a stable, well-run household, the value of the future is implicit in the rituals of the household, right? Like, the household itselfthe reason we would regard it as well-run and stable is because it does take a long-term view. And so, your point isyeah, go ahead.
Rob Henderson:Well, as youre saying this, and even as Im thinking about my own answer, Im realizing Im actually leaning more and more towards your point of view now. A story just occurred to me that I tell in the book. So, there was a period in my adolescence where there was some stability. My adoptive mother entered a relationship with this woman, and they raised me from roughly age 9 to 13, with some hiccups along the way and afterward. But I remember I was 13 years old, and my mother and her partner, Shelly, you know, I had some chores and responsibilities around the house. But they wanted me to build a fire in the mornings so that the house would be warm by the time they got up at 7:00 to get ready for work. So they asked me to get up at 5:45 or 5:30 and do this for them, because heating a home with firewood was less expensive than central heating, and northern California can get a bit frosty in the winters.
Well, as youre saying this, and even as Im thinking about my own answer, Im realizing Im actually leaning more and more towards your point of view now. A story just occurred to me that I tell in the book. So, there was a period in my adolescence where there was some stability. My adoptive mother entered a relationship with this woman, and they raised me from roughly age 9 to 13, with some hiccups along the way and afterward. But I remember I was 13 years old, and my mother and her partner, Shelly, you know, I had some chores and responsibilities around the house. But they wanted me to build a fire in the mornings so that the house would be warm by the time they got up at 7:00 to get ready for work. So they asked me to get up at 5:45 or 5:30 and do this for them, because heating a home with firewood was less expensive than central heating, and northern California can get a bit frosty in the winters.
I remember I argued with them about this, and I was angry about the idea that I had to get up so much earlier than everyone else in the house. My mom and Shelly sat me down. Im 13 years old, and again, I probably wasnt thinking much about the future, but they used thisthey said, you know, Shelly sat me down and said, Your mom and I work all day to pay the bills. Youre getting older, and you need to contribute to the house. And then they said, Youre the man of the house. I remember when they used this termit sort of reframed that chore. It went from this burden being put on me that I wanted to battle against to, No, Im a productive member of this household, and Im doing something for my moms, for my adoptive sister. Im doing something to make their lives easier.
So perhaps what youre saying about this vision of the futureif its put in the right way, if the story is told in the right waythats what that was. The man of the house was this vision, this story. It did unlock something in my mind, but it had to be presented to me in that way. I wouldnt have arrived there on my own.
Jordan Peterson:No, no, right. But I mean, I would say thats the opportunity of responsibility, right? Because its very easy, and this is why conservatives, I think, have a hard time talking to young people. Its easy to make an obligation into a finger-wagging necessity, right? Like a moral obligation. But that isnt the right way to frame a genuine responsibility, because if its a genuine responsibility, it actually matters if you do it. And the reason it matters is because if you dont do it, things actually dont go well. Theres a value to your sacrifice, and thats a good way of thinking about it. They did strike the right chord with you. I remember that part of your book, because what they indicated to you was that it was a way of signaling your mature worthnot of signaling it, but of expanding yourself up into that role.
No, no, right. But I mean, I would say thats the opportunity of responsibility, right? Because its very easy, and this is why conservatives, I think, have a hard time talking to young people. Its easy to make an obligation into a finger-wagging necessity, right? Like a moral obligation. But that isnt the right way to frame a genuine responsibility, because if its a genuine responsibility, it actually matters if you do it. And the reason it matters is because if you dont do it, things actually dont go well. Theres a value to your sacrifice, and thats a good way of thinking about it. They did strike the right chord with you. I remember that part of your book, because what they indicated to you was that it was a way of signaling your mature worthnot of signaling it, but of expanding yourself up into that role.
So how long did you light the fire, and how did you feel about doing that?
Rob Henderson:It was for that entire winter, and actually even the winter after that. I felt great about doing it after that. I mean, day-to-day, it was obnoxious and burdensome, and there were mornings I woke up and wished I didnt have to do it. But when I would see my mom and Shelly and everyone in the house wake up after me, and the house was warm, and I could see that people were comfortablewhen I woke up, it was freezing, and then when they woke up, it was warm. I would go to school in the mornings with that knowledge. Yeah, I felt good about myself for doing that.
It was for that entire winter, and actually even the winter after that. I felt great about doing it after that. I mean, day-to-day, it was obnoxious and burdensome, and there were mornings I woke up and wished I didnt have to do it. But when I would see my mom and Shelly and everyone in the house wake up after me, and the house was warm, and I could see that people were comfortablewhen I woke up, it was freezing, and then when they woke up, it was warm. I would go to school in the mornings with that knowledge. Yeah, I felt good about myself for doing that.
Jordan Peterson:Yeah, yeah. See, thats verywell, thats so interesting, right? Because that shows you too that the idea that youre inhibiting your impulsiveness is not right. What youre doing is transforming the idea of responsibility into an incentive-reward, technically, by associating it with an overarching goala genuine goal. You might say, Well, goals are arbitrarythats the moral relativism argumentbut theyre not arbitrary. Because, for example, if the house is cold, then people suffer. Now, you could say, Well, thats arbitrary too, but, you know, if youre the sort of person who thinks that suffering is arbitrary, and you can make relative arguments about it, theres no sense talking to you anyways because its just not going to go anywhere.
Yeah, yeah. See, thats verywell, thats so interesting, right? Because that shows you too that the idea that youre inhibiting your impulsiveness is not right. What youre doing is transforming the idea of responsibility into an incentive-reward, technically, by associating it with an overarching goala genuine goal. You might say, Well, goals are arbitrarythats the moral relativism argumentbut theyre not arbitrary. Because, for example, if the house is cold, then people suffer. Now, you could say, Well, thats arbitrary too, but, you know, if youre the sort of person who thinks that suffering is arbitrary, and you can make relative arguments about it, theres no sense talking to you anyways because its just not going to go anywhere.
But its so interesting to see that the proper framing of that taskI know you understand the fact that it was still difficult for you; you still had to get up in the morning when it was cold and light the fire. So, it didnt change the proximal discomfort, but they awakened you to a higher-order way of apprehending your environment. And its clearly the case throughout your autobiography that when someone opens a door like that for you in a way that got to you, that you found credible, it instantly motivated you. You even did that to yourself, to some degree, with reading. So why dont you walk through that too, because that was the first account Id read of someone who learned to read well at an old enough age that they remember the realization.
What happens to lots of kidsand this is so appalling because theres no excuse for it whatsoeveris that reading is burdensome until you can read for meaning, right? So if youre sounding out words, or even if youre sounding out phrases, or even if youre still trying to figure out sentences because you havent automatized the perceptions, then its effortful. But as soon as you cross that threshold, and now youre reading for meaning, its instantly insanely rewarding. What you need to teach kids how to read is mass practice at automatization, right? So they need to see Bs, Ps, Qs, and Ds 10,000 times, so that they build a neural circuit that just recognizes letters, recognizes two-letter combinations, three-letter combinations, common words, then common phrases. Thats about when you get to be an expert reader.
But you can remember actually working through that yourself. So why dont you tell the story about learning to read, why you decided to do that, and then also what reading did for you?
Rob Henderson:I didnt learn to read until I was seven, and most people have memories of age seven, and that was an important memory for me. So I was changing schools every three to six months, changing homes, and no one read to me, so I had to teach myself. I remember it being really... I remember just being embarrassed initially. By that point, second-grade teachers would start to call on kids to read aloud in class, and I would make a joke or say I didnt bring the right book, or I would find ways to get out of it. But I remember at one point, my teacher asked me what I wanted to be when I grew up, and I think I said I wanted to be a scientist. This was because Id caught some bit of Bill Nye the Science Guy on TV back in the '90s. She said, "If you want to be a scientist, you have to learn to read." I said, "Bill Nye never reads," and she said, "Well, he doesnt read on TV, but every scientist has to learn to read." So, I thought, "Okay, if I want to be a scientist, I have to read." It started to dawn on me that really, if you want to be anything, you have to read. The teacher let me borrow some kindergarten-level books. I took them home and slowly worked my way through them. I knew the alphabet, and I knew how to sound out each letter, but it took a lot of effort to get to that breakthrough point that you just mentioned. The point where you see the individual letters, then the words, and then you put the words together. After working through that repeatedly with books meant for four- and five-year-olds, and I was seven, it finally started to click. I could see the images in my mind, and I realized, "Okay, now things are clicking for me, and theres a story being told here." But I didnt even understand thats what I was supposed to be doing when I was reading. I would listen to stories that others told me when they would read aloud.
I didnt learn to read until I was seven, and most people have memories of age seven, and that was an important memory for me. So I was changing schools every three to six months, changing homes, and no one read to me, so I had to teach myself. I remember it being really... I remember just being embarrassed initially. By that point, second-grade teachers would start to call on kids to read aloud in class, and I would make a joke or say I didnt bring the right book, or I would find ways to get out of it. But I remember at one point, my teacher asked me what I wanted to be when I grew up, and I think I said I wanted to be a scientist. This was because Id caught some bit of Bill Nye the Science Guy on TV back in the '90s. She said, "If you want to be a scientist, you have to learn to read." I said, "Bill Nye never reads," and she said, "Well, he doesnt read on TV, but every scientist has to learn to read." So, I thought, "Okay, if I want to be a scientist, I have to read." It started to dawn on me that really, if you want to be anything, you have to read. The teacher let me borrow some kindergarten-level books. I took them home and slowly worked my way through them. I knew the alphabet, and I knew how to sound out each letter, but it took a lot of effort to get to that breakthrough point that you just mentioned. The point where you see the individual letters, then the words, and then you put the words together. After working through that repeatedly with books meant for four- and five-year-olds, and I was seven, it finally started to click. I could see the images in my mind, and I realized, "Okay, now things are clicking for me, and theres a story being told here." But I didnt even understand thats what I was supposed to be doing when I was reading. I would listen to stories that others told me when they would read aloud.
Jordan Peterson:Yeah, I wonder if thats the point where the auditory and visual systems start to overlap, like you said. The overlap between the higher-order areas of the cortex is where Alexander Luria, the great Russian neuropsychologist, identified consciousness per se. That breakthrough moment was quite striking in your book because you said you remembered when you became proficient enough at reading, which is really an auditory phenomenon. Its like youre using your eyes as ears when youre reading, and then all of a sudden, its hooked to your visual imagination. That connection emergesits got to be an overlapping system. Now the words can activate the images, and thats when true understanding begins. It was fascinating to me that you could remember when that happened. This is an unforgivable failure of the education system. Computerized tutors could teach every child to automatize letter and word recognition. The smart kids, the higher-IQ kids, will learn to automatize faster, but it would be rare indeed for a child who wouldnt get there with sufficient mass practice. Computers are excellent at this: presenting, rewarding, presenting, rewarding. Thats all you needimmediate feedback. Now, you said something very interesting in that story because you linked your motivation once again to something approximating a vision or a plan. You had nursed the idea as a childeven if it was just a casual encounter with Bill Nyethat maybe being a scientist was something you could be. So that gleamed as a distal vision, and then the teacher informed you that you had to learn to read. But youve got to ask yourself, what in the world compelled you to swallow your pride and admit you could only read kindergarten books? Thats a tough blow, and its easy for kids who should have learned something earlier to avoid admitting it to themselves because its embarrassing. But you admitted it to yourself and then went and studied by yourself, which is quite a difficult thing to do when youre not extracting meaning from the words. Do you remember at that time what motivated you to do that work?
Yeah, I wonder if thats the point where the auditory and visual systems start to overlap, like you said. The overlap between the higher-order areas of the cortex is where Alexander Luria, the great Russian neuropsychologist, identified consciousness per se. That breakthrough moment was quite striking in your book because you said you remembered when you became proficient enough at reading, which is really an auditory phenomenon. Its like youre using your eyes as ears when youre reading, and then all of a sudden, its hooked to your visual imagination. That connection emergesits got to be an overlapping system. Now the words can activate the images, and thats when true understanding begins. It was fascinating to me that you could remember when that happened. This is an unforgivable failure of the education system. Computerized tutors could teach every child to automatize letter and word recognition. The smart kids, the higher-IQ kids, will learn to automatize faster, but it would be rare indeed for a child who wouldnt get there with sufficient mass practice. Computers are excellent at this: presenting, rewarding, presenting, rewarding. Thats all you needimmediate feedback. Now, you said something very interesting in that story because you linked your motivation once again to something approximating a vision or a plan. You had nursed the idea as a childeven if it was just a casual encounter with Bill Nyethat maybe being a scientist was something you could be. So that gleamed as a distal vision, and then the teacher informed you that you had to learn to read. But youve got to ask yourself, what in the world compelled you to swallow your pride and admit you could only read kindergarten books? Thats a tough blow, and its easy for kids who should have learned something earlier to avoid admitting it to themselves because its embarrassing. But you admitted it to yourself and then went and studied by yourself, which is quite a difficult thing to do when youre not extracting meaning from the words. Do you remember at that time what motivated you to do that work?
Rob Henderson:I think part of it was a baser motivation, just not wanting to be embarrassed in class anymore when teachers called on me to read. I wanted to keep up with the other kids and be able to communicate. Kids would talk about books and make friends, and I didnt want to be the oddball kid who always had to find ways to skirt the coursework. And yes, seeing people on TV or in moviesimages of people who seemed interesting and successfulthat was something I aspired to. Its funny because you mentioned high-IQ kids find ways to teach themselves to read. Thats what I did.
I think part of it was a baser motivation, just not wanting to be embarrassed in class anymore when teachers called on me to read. I wanted to keep up with the other kids and be able to communicate. Kids would talk about books and make friends, and I didnt want to be the oddball kid who always had to find ways to skirt the coursework. And yes, seeing people on TV or in moviesimages of people who seemed interesting and successfulthat was something I aspired to. Its funny because you mentioned high-IQ kids find ways to teach themselves to read. Thats what I did.
Jordan Peterson:Right.
Right.
Rob Henderson:But its funnyright around this time, when I was teaching myself to read, I was doing so badly in school that my teacher and social worker thought I might have a learning disability. I was changing schools and homes all the time, and in hindsight, it seems ridiculous. Instead of investigating my foster care situation and the instability, the response was to medicalize it or put a diagnostic label on it. So, they sent a psychologist to the home, and I took a test. I scored just below average, so I was in the range of normal. Part of the reason I scored so low was that I did poorly on the verbal portion because I didnt know how to read. I have the files and reports from that period. It was fortunate that I scored just high enough to avoid being labeled and medicalized.
But its funnyright around this time, when I was teaching myself to read, I was doing so badly in school that my teacher and social worker thought I might have a learning disability. I was changing schools and homes all the time, and in hindsight, it seems ridiculous. Instead of investigating my foster care situation and the instability, the response was to medicalize it or put a diagnostic label on it. So, they sent a psychologist to the home, and I took a test. I scored just below average, so I was in the range of normal. Part of the reason I scored so low was that I did poorly on the verbal portion because I didnt know how to read. I have the files and reports from that period. It was fortunate that I scored just high enough to avoid being labeled and medicalized.
One of the points I make in my book is that curiosity and academic aptitude are necessary but not sufficient for doing well in school. I had the raw ingredients, but thats just one portion. You also need it to be cultivated properly. You need the stability and predictability weve been discussing. I didnt have that until I was in an environment that allowed my habits to be stable and predictable. Once I reached that environment, those qualities started to shine through. Once I learned to read, it became a source of comfort and soothing for me. I started going to school libraries, checking out books, reading biographies, and memoirs. This was a way for me to connect with people who had risen above difficult circumstances. I wasnt consciously aware at the time that I was seeking those stories for a reason, but in hindsight, I think I was looking for inspiration or guidance.
Jordan Peterson:Definitely. Thats what stories are for, fundamentally. Its unsurprising that you gravitated toward the ones that bore most specifically on your circumstances. Theres also that interplay between environmental instability and planning. Theres no point in planning if your plans are always going astray for reasons you cant control. It undermines your faith in planning itself. One of the things the military did for you was set up a situation where the rules were very clear: if you did the work, you got the reward. It worked on both ends. You said in your book that you were promoted much earlier than typical in the training regime.
Definitely. Thats what stories are for, fundamentally. Its unsurprising that you gravitated toward the ones that bore most specifically on your circumstances. Theres also that interplay between environmental instability and planning. Theres no point in planning if your plans are always going astray for reasons you cant control. It undermines your faith in planning itself. One of the things the military did for you was set up a situation where the rules were very clear: if you did the work, you got the reward. It worked on both ends. You said in your book that you were promoted much earlier than typical in the training regime.
Rob Henderson:It worked on both ends, Jordan. The reward was immediateyou perform, excel, and youll be rewarded. On the other hand, if you violate the guidelines, youll be swiftly punished. Both of those things were important. The military is like a giant Skinner box, reinforcing behaviors with positive and negative reinforcement. If you fail a random drug test, you can be court-martialed and go to military prison. In the outside world, friends who didnt follow the same path could get away with a lotdrugs, criminality, drinking and drivingfor years before facing consequences. In the military, the system was explicit: one mistake, and you face immediate punishment. It was important for me. I did well on military exams, was promoted ahead of schedule, and earned those promotions. But, as I reflect, I realize it may not have been ideal for me to achieve promotion so early.
It worked on both ends, Jordan. The reward was immediateyou perform, excel, and youll be rewarded. On the other hand, if you violate the guidelines, youll be swiftly punished. Both of those things were important. The military is like a giant Skinner box, reinforcing behaviors with positive and negative reinforcement. If you fail a random drug test, you can be court-martialed and go to military prison. In the outside world, friends who didnt follow the same path could get away with a lotdrugs, criminality, drinking and drivingfor years before facing consequences. In the military, the system was explicit: one mistake, and you face immediate punishment. It was important for me. I did well on military exams, was promoted ahead of schedule, and earned those promotions. But, as I reflect, I realize it may not have been ideal for me to achieve promotion so early.
In the Air Force at the time, once you reached a certain rank, you could move off-base, get a house, and live in the civilian world. I got promoted quickly, and by the time I was 19, I had a house with friends off-base, which became a giant party house. This led to bad decisions, drinking, and trouble. Its ironic that excelling led me to complete freedom, which allowed me to make self-defeating decisions.
Jordan Peterson:Lets talk more about the chaos. When I was reading your book, I noticed some overlap in our experiences. I grew up in a little town in the middle of nowhere, a working-class community. Most of my friends never went to college, although a few did. There were some important differences between my upbringing and yours. Almost all my parents friends had intact families. My mom and dad had close family friends, and my relativesmy aunts and unclesvirtually no divorce. It was true for my friends too. My relationship with my father was better than most of my friends' relationships with theirs, often due to alcoholism. But my delinquent friends, like the ones you describe, all had intact families. Thats what struck me about your biographythe additional cataclysmic consequences of continually fragmented primary relationships.
Lets talk more about the chaos. When I was reading your book, I noticed some overlap in our experiences. I grew up in a little town in the middle of nowhere, a working-class community. Most of my friends never went to college, although a few did. There were some important differences between my upbringing and yours. Almost all my parents friends had intact families. My mom and dad had close family friends, and my relativesmy aunts and unclesvirtually no divorce. It was true for my friends too. My relationship with my father was better than most of my friends' relationships with theirs, often due to alcoholism. But my delinquent friends, like the ones you describe, all had intact families. Thats what struck me about your biographythe additional cataclysmic consequences of continually fragmented primary relationships.
Rob Henderson:Yeah, thats an interesting point. I remember listening to you describe your early life and thinking about how working-class communities have changed. I cite Charles Murrays bookComing Apart, where he talks about the decline of intact families in the U.S. In 1960, 95% of children, regardless of social class, were raised by both birth parents. By 2005, in upper-class familiescollege-educated parentsit dropped to 85%. In working-class families, it dropped from 95% to 30%. That statistic perfectly reflected my experience. My post-college friends were all raised in intact families, but growing up in Red Bluff, none of my five close friends were. I was in foster care, some had single moms, one was raised by a single dad, and another by a grandmother because his mom was on drugs and his dad was in prison. This is common in these communities now.
Yeah, thats an interesting point. I remember listening to you describe your early life and thinking about how working-class communities have changed. I cite Charles Murrays book
, where he talks about the decline of intact families in the U.S. In 1960, 95% of children, regardless of social class, were raised by both birth parents. By 2005, in upper-class familiescollege-educated parentsit dropped to 85%. In working-class families, it dropped from 95% to 30%. That statistic perfectly reflected my experience. My post-college friends were all raised in intact families, but growing up in Red Bluff, none of my five close friends were. I was in foster care, some had single moms, one was raised by a single dad, and another by a grandmother because his mom was on drugs and his dad was in prison. This is common in these communities now.
I remember seeing an interview with you, Jordan. I don't remember exactly which one, but you talked about how family deterioration has hit people based on their level of marginalization and vulnerability. You mentioned how it hit poor Black families first, then poor white families, then working-class families, and now, by the late '90s, I was seeing that even lower middle-class families were deteriorating more and more. It's creeping upward, but there's still that rarified upper segment of society, the top quintile, that is almost completely shielded from it and has no exposure to what's happening in the rest of society.
Jordan Peterson:Well, let's go there. I want to walk through your biography a bit more so we can talk about your experiences with higher education and maybe meld that into what we're going to talk about next. I left my little town, got a college education first, and then I went to a fairly large university in Edmonton. From there, I went to McGill, and so I was kind of climbing up the ladder of sophistication and educational achievement, right? And then I went from McGill to Harvard, so I came from this little town and hit the top of the academic pyramid, at least as it existed in the '90s. That was really something. So, in Alberta, the province I grew up in there wasn't much of a class structure at all. Alberta was too new to have a class structure. Montreal had a clear class structure, and Boston, of course, much clearer than Montreal even. And so, I got to see what it meant that a class structure existed. One of the things I really came to understand as I progressed through the university system was this warped elitist culture that increasingly came to characterize the universities. And so, what I sawlook, a lot of the students I had at Harvard were really top-rate kids, and Harvard in the 90s was a very merit-based institution. Now, if you were a legacy studentif your parents had gone to Harvardyou had an edge at admissions, but even so, the probability that you were going to be a legacy student who couldn't cut it was pretty damn low. So, the typical student was extremely academically gifted and then good at at least two other things, right? So, these were stellar students.
Well, let's go there. I want to walk through your biography a bit more so we can talk about your experiences with higher education and maybe meld that into what we're going to talk about next. I left my little town, got a college education first, and then I went to a fairly large university in Edmonton. From there, I went to McGill, and so I was kind of climbing up the ladder of sophistication and educational achievement, right? And then I went from McGill to Harvard, so I came from this little town and hit the top of the academic pyramid, at least as it existed in the '90s. That was really something. So, in Alberta, the province I grew up in there wasn't much of a class structure at all. Alberta was too new to have a class structure. Montreal had a clear class structure, and Boston, of course, much clearer than Montreal even. And so, I got to see what it meant that a class structure existed. One of the things I really came to understand as I progressed through the university system was this warped elitist culture that increasingly came to characterize the universities. And so, what I sawlook, a lot of the students I had at Harvard were really top-rate kids, and Harvard in the 90s was a very merit-based institution. Now, if you were a legacy studentif your parents had gone to Harvardyou had an edge at admissions, but even so, the probability that you were going to be a legacy student who couldn't cut it was pretty damn low. So, the typical student was extremely academically gifted and then good at at least two other things, right? So, these were stellar students.
But the more radical types, they had this proclivity that really disturbed me, which was that having all the privileges of being privileged wasn't nearly enough. They needed to have all the privileges of being privileged and all the privileges of being underprivileged at the same time. And so, I want to run a variant of the luxury beliefs idea past you, because I think luxury beliefs have which is a lovely phrase, by the waythey have two dimensions. The first is they provide you with a universal explanation for very complex phenomena so you don't have to think about them ever again. And the oppressor-oppressed narrative fits that perfectly, right? Because you can analyzeits like Marxism goneits like manic Marxism. Marx, at least, had the sense to note that the primary differentiator in terms of oppression was economic. And you can make a reasonable case that to those who have more, more accrues. And you can also make a case that once you have it, it's easy to engage in regulatory capture to make the playing field unfair, so you can sustain your advantage. Okay, so if you're going to throw the Marxists their bone, that would be the bone to throw them.
Well, Marxism fell out of favor in the 1970s, even among intellectuals, although they were very annoyed about it. And then it morphed into this meta-Marxism where every single possible comparison between people became an oppressor-oppressed comparison. Now, the advantage to that is that you can learn that analytic process in 10 minutes. So, we did some research in 2016 that showed very clearly that the best predictor of politically correct authoritarianismso, you can imagine that that's this insistence upon an oppressor-oppressed narrative; there's a cloud of ideas that surrounds thatthe best predictor of that was low verbal intelligence. It was a walloping predictor. It was correlatedI think it was negative .48. It was more correlated than grades and IQ. It was a walloping correlation.
But theres another element too, thatand this is probably more germane specifically to the notion of luxury beliefis that, imagine that people have beliefs because they explain the world, but also imagine that they have beliefs because they confer upon the holder unearned moral virtue. And this oppressor-oppressed narrative is a two-for-one, because it provides you with a comprehensive explanation of every sociological, political, and economic interaction imaginable, because they can all be viewed through the lens of power. Plus, it presents you with a one-move solution to being moral. And itsorry, there's three elements. The one-move solution is: you identify with the oppressed, you're virtuous. But then there's the shadow of that, which is: once you've identified the oppressor, you have a valid target for your darkest desires. So, you got three attractions to that dread doctrine, right? Stupid people can understand it quickly, with no effort. That works out real well in departments of education, for example, or faculties of education or social work.
Rob Henderson:Yes, absolutely.
Yes, absolutely.
Jordan Peterson:Well, we know perfectly well that the disciplines in universities that have the students with the lowest IQ are the most woke. Like, the data are crystal clear. So, it's very attractive if you're not very bright, and that's also attractive to your teachers if they're also not very bright. And I'm talking about you, faculties of education professors. And so, then you are morally virtuous because you're standing for the oppressed, oryeah, for the oppressed. Or you can even claim oppression for yourself, at least by proxy. And so, there you get to have the advantage of being in the oppressor class, which you clearly are if you're in an elite university. But because you're an ally, you dont have to pay any attention to that. Plus, now you have a target for yourthis is where I think the anti-Semitism is really instantly understandable, right? Because there's nothing more fun than being anti-Semitic with a moral twist. But if you read the history of anti-Semitism, it's always been that way.
Well, we know perfectly well that the disciplines in universities that have the students with the lowest IQ are the most woke. Like, the data are crystal clear. So, it's very attractive if you're not very bright, and that's also attractive to your teachers if they're also not very bright. And I'm talking about you, faculties of education professors. And so, then you are morally virtuous because you're standing for the oppressed, oryeah, for the oppressed. Or you can even claim oppression for yourself, at least by proxy. And so, there you get to have the advantage of being in the oppressor class, which you clearly are if you're in an elite university. But because you're an ally, you dont have to pay any attention to that. Plus, now you have a target for yourthis is where I think the anti-Semitism is really instantly understandable, right? Because there's nothing more fun than being anti-Semitic with a moral twist. But if you read the history of anti-Semitism, it's always been that way.
Rob Henderson:Yeah, thats not new.
Yeah, thats not new.
Jordan Peterson:That's not new. You identify the Jews as oppressors, and then you're moral for persecuting them. And that's perfect, right? If you're resentful and bitter and you need a target for your bile and spite, that oppressor-oppressed narrative just gives you all of that at once.
That's not new. You identify the Jews as oppressors, and then you're moral for persecuting them. And that's perfect, right? If you're resentful and bitter and you need a target for your bile and spite, that oppressor-oppressed narrative just gives you all of that at once.
And that seems to meso you have worked a lot at fleshing out this idea of luxury beliefs, and, I believe, coined the term and popularized it, which is, you know, quite an achievement. Because its hard to hit a phrase so accurately that it becomes a part of the culture.
Rob Henderson:I coined this term luxury beliefs, defined as ideas and opinions that confer status on the elite while inflicting costs on the lower classes. And no, I think that all of those sort of ideas that you laid out there fall under that framework. A core feature of a luxury belief, too, is that the believer is sheltered from the consequences of his or her belief. And so, you know, as you're describing this, you know, the oppressor-oppressedyou don't have to think too deeply. I'm reminded of a quote from the cognitive scientist Pascal Boyer. He has this line: "Theory is information for free." And it's kind of this tongue-in-cheek line that, you know, once you have the theory, you don't have to learn anything, because you just enter this new environment and you learn a few facts, but you have this theory available to you to just sort of twist everything into this
I coined this term luxury beliefs, defined as ideas and opinions that confer status on the elite while inflicting costs on the lower classes. And no, I think that all of those sort of ideas that you laid out there fall under that framework. A core feature of a luxury belief, too, is that the believer is sheltered from the consequences of his or her belief. And so, you know, as you're describing this, you know, the oppressor-oppressedyou don't have to think too deeply. I'm reminded of a quote from the cognitive scientist Pascal Boyer. He has this line: "Theory is information for free." And it's kind of this tongue-in-cheek line that, you know, once you have the theory, you don't have to learn anything, because you just enter this new environment and you learn a few facts, but you have this theory available to you to just sort of twist everything into this
Jordan Peterson:Compression algorithm.
Compression algorithm.
Rob Henderson:Yeah, and it allows you to avoid the difficult work of learning. Well, and then, if you're removed from the consequenceswhich you are if you're protected by your wealththen you also are never in a situation where your idiot theories can be disproven. And then, by the time your ideas are implemented into policy or into the culture, you move on to the next thing, and you can outrun the consequences of your own beliefs. It doesn't always work that way, but often it does. And then, yeah, the oppressor-oppressedthe ability to claim the mantle of virtue. I see it still at elite universities, that, you know, these inhabitants, these graduate students and graduates of elite universities. Its not enough for them to be members of the socioeconomic 1%, but they also want to be seen as good people. And I think they wrestle with some of this guilt for being so privileged and so fortunate, and so they attempt to compensate by, you know, exploitingI mean, I saw this a lot at Yaletheyre exploiting whatever commonality they have with historically mistreated groups. And some of it, honestly, seemed strategic and duplicitous, because, you know, these are very competitive institutions, and every edge helps. And so, if you can claim to be non-binary, or you can claim to be a member of this or that or the other group, then you can get an edge in a prestigious internship or into the law school of your choice or whatever student organization.
Yeah, and it allows you to avoid the difficult work of learning. Well, and then, if you're removed from the consequenceswhich you are if you're protected by your wealththen you also are never in a situation where your idiot theories can be disproven. And then, by the time your ideas are implemented into policy or into the culture, you move on to the next thing, and you can outrun the consequences of your own beliefs. It doesn't always work that way, but often it does. And then, yeah, the oppressor-oppressedthe ability to claim the mantle of virtue. I see it still at elite universities, that, you know, these inhabitants, these graduate students and graduates of elite universities. Its not enough for them to be members of the socioeconomic 1%, but they also want to be seen as good people. And I think they wrestle with some of this guilt for being so privileged and so fortunate, and so they attempt to compensate by, you know, exploitingI mean, I saw this a lot at Yaletheyre exploiting whatever commonality they have with historically mistreated groups. And some of it, honestly, seemed strategic and duplicitous, because, you know, these are very competitive institutions, and every edge helps. And so, if you can claim to be non-binary, or you can claim to be a member of this or that or the other group, then you can get an edge in a prestigious internship or into the law school of your choice or whatever student organization.
Jordan Peterson:Well, you can also see how that can produceso a lot of psychopathology is positive feedback loop gone mad, right? And so, you can see a positive feedback loop there because the ideology tilts in the direction of privileging marginalization. Well, then all you have to do is claim marginalization to become privileged. Well, then the thing is just like, you're just done, especially as you pointed out, when they're really competitive types. And there's nothingI mean, one of the real advantages to the U.S. elite, lets say, is their insanely driven competitiveness. But look the hell out if thats taken a bent turn, because now it's going to be
Well, you can also see how that can produceso a lot of psychopathology is positive feedback loop gone mad, right? And so, you can see a positive feedback loop there because the ideology tilts in the direction of privileging marginalization. Well, then all you have to do is claim marginalization to become privileged. Well, then the thing is just like, you're just done, especially as you pointed out, when they're really competitive types. And there's nothingI mean, one of the real advantages to the U.S. elite, lets say, is their insanely driven competitiveness. But look the hell out if thats taken a bent turn, because now it's going to be
Rob Henderson:Well, itsit's so interesting too, because as you point out, it's competition for marginalization without bearing any of the cost of marginalization, right? So that's a pretty good deal. In fact, youre rewarded for claiming to be oppressed.
Well, itsit's so interesting too, because as you point out, it's competition for marginalization without bearing any of the cost of marginalization, right? So that's a pretty good deal. In fact, youre rewarded for claiming to be oppressed.
Jordan Peterson:And there are probably more nefarious things going on under the surface too, like, interference with reproduction of other people is a mating strategy. Its a reproductive strategy, and so God only knows how deep that goes.
And there are probably more nefarious things going on under the surface too, like, interference with reproduction of other people is a mating strategy. Its a reproductive strategy, and so God only knows how deep that goes.
Rob Henderson:I read the study by a professor at the Columbia Business School. He did a study of students at elite universities and their willingness to disclose marginalized identities. And what he found was that forfor the identity categories that the elite care a lot aboutgender, ethnicity, sexual orientation, those thingsstudents at elite universities are perfectly happy to disclose those identities and speak openly about them. There was only one marginalized identity that students were very reluctant to discuss publicly at elite universities in those settings. Unsurprisingly, that identity was low socioeconomic status. Students from low-income families were embarrassed to speak about being poor. Students from rich families were reluctant to speak about being rich. These other identities, we've gone a long way to becoming more tolerant and welcoming and so on, but being poor, regardless of time and place, its always difficult. And that's the one thing that these universities and the students within them don't want to discuss or concentrate on.
I read the study by a professor at the Columbia Business School. He did a study of students at elite universities and their willingness to disclose marginalized identities. And what he found was that forfor the identity categories that the elite care a lot aboutgender, ethnicity, sexual orientation, those thingsstudents at elite universities are perfectly happy to disclose those identities and speak openly about them. There was only one marginalized identity that students were very reluctant to discuss publicly at elite universities in those settings. Unsurprisingly, that identity was low socioeconomic status. Students from low-income families were embarrassed to speak about being poor. Students from rich families were reluctant to speak about being rich. These other identities, we've gone a long way to becoming more tolerant and welcoming and so on, but being poor, regardless of time and place, its always difficult. And that's the one thing that these universities and the students within them don't want to discuss or concentrate on.
Jordan Peterson:Well, I also think that the overwhelming emphasis on sexual identity has an unbelievably dark shadow too, because, I mean, sexuality, like any primal drive, is verywhen in its full manifestation, its very focused on the immediate now. Everyone knows that sexuality, like aggression, can be exploitative. In fact, the woke types squeak about that all the time because they view most heterosexual normativity as exploitative sexuality. They're perfectly aware that sexuality can be exploitative. But if you're out for a hedonistic time, then valorizing your sexual identity is the best way of transforming a vice into a moral virtue, right? Its veryit's unbelievably dark.
Well, I also think that the overwhelming emphasis on sexual identity has an unbelievably dark shadow too, because, I mean, sexuality, like any primal drive, is verywhen in its full manifestation, its very focused on the immediate now. Everyone knows that sexuality, like aggression, can be exploitative. In fact, the woke types squeak about that all the time because they view most heterosexual normativity as exploitative sexuality. They're perfectly aware that sexuality can be exploitative. But if you're out for a hedonistic time, then valorizing your sexual identity is the best way of transforming a vice into a moral virtue, right? Its veryit's unbelievably dark.
One of the things I've been quite struck by recently tooso there's a lot of research on the dark tetrad now, right? Psychopathy, Machiavellianism, narcissism, and sadism. Because they had to add sadism, because it looks like those other three culminate in sadism. Okay, so here's a question: What predicts short-term mating proclivity? Answer is: well, its dark tetrad proclivity. And that's related to something even more deepbiologically. Because there's two types of reproductive strategy. There's K and R, and K means carrying capacity, and R just means reproduction. Like a mosquito is an R reproducer, so it has like a million offspring, and one lives. Beings are the ultimate exemplar of K strategists: very few offspring, extremely high investment. But then within human beings, there are K and R reproducers. And the R reproducers are the dark tetrad types. So, you can't have sexual licentiousness on the basis of identity without inviting in the sadistic psychopaths. So that's another fun little twist on the luxury belief phenomenon.
Rob Henderson:What I find interesting about people who want to speak about their identities around sexual orientation is, there are many people happy to identify with this sexual orientation or that, but very few people seem to be willing or eager to be identified with their actual sexual history, in terms of their actual behavior. And Im thinking here around this idea around slut-shaming, or around how many partners you've had or, you know, what young people now call body count. There's a lot of concern aroundyou know, don't speak about that, don't shame people for their sexual behaviorbut its interesting because people will identify with the label, but then disavow the actions around the label.
What I find interesting about people who want to speak about their identities around sexual orientation is, there are many people happy to identify with this sexual orientation or that, but very few people seem to be willing or eager to be identified with their actual sexual history, in terms of their actual behavior. And Im thinking here around this idea around slut-shaming, or around how many partners you've had or, you know, what young people now call body count. There's a lot of concern aroundyou know, don't speak about that, don't shame people for their sexual behaviorbut its interesting because people will identify with the label, but then disavow the actions around the label.
Jordan Peterson:Well, I would say, as a clinician, the rationale for that's quite clear, because, look, one of the best predictors, one of the most reliable correlates and predictors of later criminality is early promiscuity. Thats been known for like 40 years. And its partly because the psychopathic, narcissistic, Machiavellian, sadists exploit other people and themselves for sexual gratification. Well, the reason that theres a brouhaha about slut-shaming is because the hedonistic narcissists don't want to be called out for their behavior. And so, what they do is they make being held responsible for their own deviant and exploitative behaviorthey make being called out on that a moral failing of the person they're accusing.
Well, I would say, as a clinician, the rationale for that's quite clear, because, look, one of the best predictors, one of the most reliable correlates and predictors of later criminality is early promiscuity. Thats been known for like 40 years. And its partly because the psychopathic, narcissistic, Machiavellian, sadists exploit other people and themselves for sexual gratification. Well, the reason that theres a brouhaha about slut-shaming is because the hedonistic narcissists don't want to be called out for their behavior. And so, what they do is they make being held responsible for their own deviant and exploitative behaviorthey make being called out on that a moral failing of the person they're accusing.
Rob Henderson:Yeah, which is a really interesting maneuver. It reminds me ofthere was a big study in 2020 which found thatso, this was on the dark triad. Sadism wasn't studied in this particular paper, but they found that the dark triad traits correlated with victim signaling.
Yeah, which is a really interesting maneuver. It reminds me ofthere was a big study in 2020 which found thatso, this was on the dark triad. Sadism wasn't studied in this particular paper, but they found that the dark triad traits correlated with victim signaling.
Jordan Peterson:Yeah, that's a typical cluster B psychopathology. Its like the way that you cover up your predation with the claim of victimization.
Yeah, that's a typical cluster B psychopathology. Its like the way that you cover up your predation with the claim of victimization.
Rob Henderson: The researchers of this paper, they described how billions of dollars are lost in insurance fraud caseswell, hundreds of millions rather, in insurance fraud cases. And so, people will lie to advantage themselves, and people who score highly in the dark triad are especially likely to do so. They note that, in modern Western societies, we have this attitude toward people who are victimizedthat they should be compensated, treated well, and sympathized with. And people who are high in the dark triad are very good at monitoring their environment, looking at what strategies they can execute to extract some kind of social, professional, or sexual reward.
: The researchers of this paper, they described how billions of dollars are lost in insurance fraud caseswell, hundreds of millions rather, in insurance fraud cases. And so, people will lie to advantage themselves, and people who score highly in the dark triad are especially likely to do so. They note that, in modern Western societies, we have this attitude toward people who are victimizedthat they should be compensated, treated well, and sympathized with. And people who are high in the dark triad are very good at monitoring their environment, looking at what strategies they can execute to extract some kind of social, professional, or sexual reward.
More and more, its claiming the mantle of victimhood, which iswell, its important to be clear that its not that people who are actually victimized are likely to score high in the dark triad. Its that people high in the dark triad are very manipulative and aware that pretending to wear the camouflage of victimhood can be advantageous. Its tricky as a society because we want to sympathize with genuine victims, but we also need to be aware of the dark triad types who pretend to be victims to exploit that sympathy.
Jordan Peterson: Okay, so thats been well-modeled by the game theorists. If you have a group of cooperatorslets say theyre agreeable, and theyre sympathetic to the I dont want to say victimized. I want to say the hurt, the sick, the infantile, right? The agreeable cooperators will attend to the sick, the elderly, and the infantile. Theyre the ones who are genuinely in need. Theyre also the ones for whom the provision of help is advantageous.
: Okay, so thats been well-modeled by the game theorists. If you have a group of cooperatorslets say theyre agreeable, and theyre sympathetic to the I dont want to say victimized. I want to say the hurt, the sick, the infantile, right? The agreeable cooperators will attend to the sick, the elderly, and the infantile. Theyre the ones who are genuinely in need. Theyre also the ones for whom the provision of help is advantageous.
Now imagine you have a group of those people together, and theyre all cooperating. They do just fine. But if you throw one psychopath into the equation, he takes everything. This has been modeled out very well. The pathology of agreeableness is that its indefinitely open to subversion. Thats why you needand of course, the psychopathic types, the narcissists, they know this perfectly well, especially the Cluster B types. Theyre absolutely willing to proclaim victim status as loudly as possible on any dimension whatsoever to gain an advantage. They want to gain the upper hand practically, but also the moral upper hand.
The right way to think about this is that there isnt anything more valuable than reputation. Theres no difference between reputation and wealth, fundamentally. Even monetary wealth is a form of abstracted reputation. Money is just a tokenization of reputation. The problem is, reputation can be gamed. We know, too, that young women are much more likely to fall for the dark tetrad types because they mimic reputation. Thats their confidence and competence.
Rob Henderson: They have the confidence of the competent without the competence. Especially more and more now, this is the discussion around cancel culture and mobbing. People treat it like its unserious, but people care deeply about how theyre viewed in the eyes of othersabout social esteem. I remember a study from a few years agoit came out in 2017. Roy Baumeister was one of the authors. I dont recall everyone on the paper, but they looked at the World Value Survey and pulled out certain items. They found that, right next to physical safety, reputation was the second priority for people.
: They have the confidence of the competent without the competence. Especially more and more now, this is the discussion around cancel culture and mobbing. People treat it like its unserious, but people care deeply about how theyre viewed in the eyes of othersabout social esteem. I remember a study from a few years agoit came out in 2017. Roy Baumeister was one of the authors. I dont recall everyone on the paper, but they looked at the World Value Survey and pulled out certain items. They found that, right next to physical safety, reputation was the second priority for people.
Some of the studies were interesting. They gave forced-choice questions to participants in a separate study within the paper. They asked people, essentially, Would you rather have a body part amputated or be known as a Nazi or a pedophile? Most of the participants said they would rather lose an arm or a leg than be known as something so vile as a pedophile or Nazi. People care deeply about these things, and dark triad types are aware of this. They know how to target peoples reputations and form mobs.
Im really interested in all the correlates of the dark tetrad and dark triad traits. One of them is age. Youre probably aware of this, Dr. Peterson. Theres an inverse correlation between age and scores on the dark tetrad, such that younger adults score higher on these traits than older adults. Yet, we have this situation, more and more in society and on college campuses, where older adults are abdicating their responsibility and letting young adultswho, in disproportionate numbers, would actually qualify for clinical levels of psychopathy and narcissism. Generally speaking, they score higher than average on those scales anyway. A large share of them are eager for power, influence, and wealth, and theyre willing to do whatever they can to maneuver their way to the top.
Jordan Peterson: I think theres something even more ominous going on, Rob. Historically speaking, the typical psychopath was a wandereran itinerant. Thats a trope from every horror movie you can imagine: the itinerant serial killer. Well, why do you have to be itinerant? Its because if you live in a closed community and you screw people over, your reputation gets around instantly. People are unbelievably good at tracking cheating. Theres some evidence we have an evolved module for remembering cheatersits a major deal.
: I think theres something even more ominous going on, Rob. Historically speaking, the typical psychopath was a wandereran itinerant. Thats a trope from every horror movie you can imagine: the itinerant serial killer. Well, why do you have to be itinerant? Its because if you live in a closed community and you screw people over, your reputation gets around instantly. People are unbelievably good at tracking cheating. Theres some evidence we have an evolved module for remembering cheatersits a major deal.
Rob Henderson: Exactly.
: Exactly.
Jordan Peterson: You have to go find new victims. You do that by hiding, camouflaging yourself as a new person. Now, weve invented a new worlda virtual world. Virtualization enables psychopaths because you cant do reputation tracking. God only knows how dangerous that is. Its happening online, of course, but even in the real world. We touched on this the last time you and I spoke on your show about dating apps. One of the things dating apps allow forwhile theyre online platforms, they allow people to meet in real lifeis that dark triad types and dark tetrad types are able to have multiple partners in non-overlapping social circles. In the past, if you wanted to sleep around, word would get out, and youd develop a reputation as a scoundrel or philanderer. But now, you can have multiple different partners who dont know one another, who arent members of your social circle, and none of them are aware of whats going on. This allows psychopathic types to indulge their appetites with no reputational penalties.
: You have to go find new victims. You do that by hiding, camouflaging yourself as a new person. Now, weve invented a new worlda virtual world. Virtualization enables psychopaths because you cant do reputation tracking. God only knows how dangerous that is. Its happening online, of course, but even in the real world. We touched on this the last time you and I spoke on your show about dating apps. One of the things dating apps allow forwhile theyre online platforms, they allow people to meet in real lifeis that dark triad types and dark tetrad types are able to have multiple partners in non-overlapping social circles. In the past, if you wanted to sleep around, word would get out, and youd develop a reputation as a scoundrel or philanderer. But now, you can have multiple different partners who dont know one another, who arent members of your social circle, and none of them are aware of whats going on. This allows psychopathic types to indulge their appetites with no reputational penalties.
Rob Henderson: It probably makes things even worse.
: It probably makes things even worse.
Jordan Peterson: Yeah, because you can imagine borderline casesand those would even be young men to some degree, as theyre tilted more toward narcissism and psychopathy. Thats also a consequence of incomplete cortical maturation. The problem with consequence-free dating is that theres no price to be paid for your flings. The question is: What do you become if you practice predatory sexuality? The answer is that you tilt yourself in the psychopathic direction because youre deriving immediate gratification with no reputational or practical responsibility.
: Yeah, because you can imagine borderline casesand those would even be young men to some degree, as theyre tilted more toward narcissism and psychopathy. Thats also a consequence of incomplete cortical maturation. The problem with consequence-free dating is that theres no price to be paid for your flings. The question is: What do you become if you practice predatory sexuality? The answer is that you tilt yourself in the psychopathic direction because youre deriving immediate gratification with no reputational or practical responsibility.
The people advertising for hedonism I just watchedCabaret. Have you seen it?
The people advertising for hedonism I just watched
. Have you seen it?
Rob Henderson: I havent.
: I havent.
Jordan Peterson: I highly recommend it. Its about the Weimar Republic in Germany, and its about a cabaret. The protagonist is a young woman, a Cluster B type, who wants to be a movie actress. Shes running down the hedonistic road at a cabaret. Shes quite promiscuous, deluded, and clueless. She has her little coterie of followers, and she performs at the cabaret. Like many Cluster B people, especially the histrionic types, she has a certain degree of artistic talent. That goes along with that fluidity of identity, because artists are shape-changers, obviously.
: I highly recommend it. Its about the Weimar Republic in Germany, and its about a cabaret. The protagonist is a young woman, a Cluster B type, who wants to be a movie actress. Shes running down the hedonistic road at a cabaret. Shes quite promiscuous, deluded, and clueless. She has her little coterie of followers, and she performs at the cabaret. Like many Cluster B people, especially the histrionic types, she has a certain degree of artistic talent. That goes along with that fluidity of identity, because artists are shape-changers, obviously.
Anyway, the movie tracks her descent, along with the people she more or less pulls along with her. Whats very interesting is that the director does a brilliant job of showing the Nazis in the background constantly. Theres this immense tension between hedonism, this unbridled hedonistic short-term lifestyle thats supposedly free and enlightenedlike the luxury belief typesand the Nazis waiting in the wings.
Ive been trying to puzzle this out conceptually. Imagine that a large portion of the population devolves toward impulsive sensualitya responsibility-less mode of being. As your book indicates, things fall apart because of that. When things fall apart, theres an unconscious clamor for the tyrant. You get this hedonism-tyranny dynamic. You see the same thing inPinocchio. Remember, the delinquent boys go to Pleasure Island, but underneath are the slavers who turn them into braying jackasses. That movie came out just before World War IIthey had their finger on the pulse.
Ive been trying to puzzle this out conceptually. Imagine that a large portion of the population devolves toward impulsive sensualitya responsibility-less mode of being. As your book indicates, things fall apart because of that. When things fall apart, theres an unconscious clamor for the tyrant. You get this hedonism-tyranny dynamic. You see the same thing in
. Remember, the delinquent boys go to Pleasure Island, but underneath are the slavers who turn them into braying jackasses. That movie came out just before World War IIthey had their finger on the pulse.
Theres this insistence in classic stories that hedonism and tyranny go hand in hand. Its bread and circuses, to some degree, like with the Roman emperors. But its deeper than that. If the entire population insists on maintaining immaturity and the hedonistic gratification that goes along with it, there will inevitably be a corresponding demand from the unconscious to elevate the figure of the missing authority to maintain order.
Rob Henderson: I read this study by Michael Bang Petersen, a Danish psychologist, and some of his co-authors. The study was on populism and status. They had a variety of different measures. One of the things they concluded was that people who support populism arent actually that interested in status themselves. What they want is a strong leader. They arent interested in ascending to high positions in society; theyd rather elect a strong man to implement their preferences while they go about their business and live their lives. Theyre not that interested in getting involved in influential political and cultural roles, whereas people who are opposed to populism have a strong desire for status and dont like the idea of a strongman. They themselves want to be the influential leader or the person who gets to call the shots. And they don't like the idea of the strong man. And Im thinking about what you're describingthat the kinds of people who are tilting more and more towards populism, they are looking at their lives and they're not seeing their preferences and values reflected in the communities around them. Families deteriorating, community suffering, people out of work, jobless, addicted to drugs, and so on. Maybe they themselves aren't interested in a political career, but if they hear someone say how they're going to fix things and clean things up, they'll vote for that person. Meanwhile, the upper segment of society, when they look around, they see an environment of relative order and cleanliness and people who are doing well for themselveshighly educated and well-offthey don't see the need for a strong man leader. Many of the people who are in those sort of gated, safe areas, they themselves are interested in influential positions in society, and theyre the ones who want to run things.
: I read this study by Michael Bang Petersen, a Danish psychologist, and some of his co-authors. The study was on populism and status. They had a variety of different measures. One of the things they concluded was that people who support populism arent actually that interested in status themselves. What they want is a strong leader. They arent interested in ascending to high positions in society; theyd rather elect a strong man to implement their preferences while they go about their business and live their lives. Theyre not that interested in getting involved in influential political and cultural roles, whereas people who are opposed to populism have a strong desire for status and dont like the idea of a strongman. They themselves want to be the influential leader or the person who gets to call the shots. And they don't like the idea of the strong man. And Im thinking about what you're describingthat the kinds of people who are tilting more and more towards populism, they are looking at their lives and they're not seeing their preferences and values reflected in the communities around them. Families deteriorating, community suffering, people out of work, jobless, addicted to drugs, and so on. Maybe they themselves aren't interested in a political career, but if they hear someone say how they're going to fix things and clean things up, they'll vote for that person. Meanwhile, the upper segment of society, when they look around, they see an environment of relative order and cleanliness and people who are doing well for themselveshighly educated and well-offthey don't see the need for a strong man leader. Many of the people who are in those sort of gated, safe areas, they themselves are interested in influential positions in society, and theyre the ones who want to run things.
Jordan Peterson: Okay, so you'd have to differentiate that further because then you could differentiate the populist admirers into two camps. Thered be those that are generally concerned with the emergence of disorder and who don't know what to do about it, and then thered be those who want to abdicate all responsibility for self-governance to a centralized authority.
: Okay, so you'd have to differentiate that further because then you could differentiate the populist admirers into two camps. Thered be those that are generally concerned with the emergence of disorder and who don't know what to do about it, and then thered be those who want to abdicate all responsibility for self-governance to a centralized authority.
Rob Henderson: Interesting, right. Exactly.
: Interesting, right. Exactly.
Jordan Peterson: Now, on the wealthy side, you'd have the same kind of division. You'd have the people who genuinely want to take responsibility for the political, and those who are opposed to populists because thats competition for their psychopathic power-seeking.
: Now, on the wealthy side, you'd have the same kind of division. You'd have the people who genuinely want to take responsibility for the political, and those who are opposed to populists because thats competition for their psychopathic power-seeking.
Rob Henderson: Yes, yes. That sounds right.
: Yes, yes. That sounds right.
Jordan Peterson: Yeah, so theres a sort of benevolent and malevolent side to both of those.
: Yeah, so theres a sort of benevolent and malevolent side to both of those.
Rob Henderson: Yes, exactly.
: Yes, exactly.
Jordan Peterson: Well, you know, I havent seen any psychological research pertaining to the relationship between impulsive hedonism and admiration for more authoritarian beliefs.
: Well, you know, I havent seen any psychological research pertaining to the relationship between impulsive hedonism and admiration for more authoritarian beliefs.
Rob Henderson: Hmm, I havent seen that. It would be very interesting to see that tested.
: Hmm, I havent seen that. It would be very interesting to see that tested.
Jordan Peterson: No, Ive seen nothing like that. Right, because and thats well, there are lots of things that psychologists do a very bad job of studying, and certainly left-wing authoritarianism is very high up there on the list. And so, the other thing I was curious aboutsomething you said earlier. You know, Ive really been struck in recent years by the willingness of the left, in particularand these are the leftists who I think are part of the camp that you described as the elitists who want it all. Theyre very willing to sacrifice the poor to their hypothetical ideals.
: No, Ive seen nothing like that. Right, because and thats well, there are lots of things that psychologists do a very bad job of studying, and certainly left-wing authoritarianism is very high up there on the list. And so, the other thing I was curious aboutsomething you said earlier. You know, Ive really been struck in recent years by the willingness of the left, in particularand these are the leftists who I think are part of the camp that you described as the elitists who want it all. Theyre very willing to sacrifice the poor to their hypothetical ideals.
And so, Ive also seen no research at allIm very curious to know what the cloud of meaning around these so-called luxury beliefs might be. You know, because one of the things Ive really seen happen in Europeits really an appalling thing to watchis that the very people who once so these people on the left who once were hypothetically on the side of the economically oppressed, are absolutely 100% willing to implement policies that will demolish the poor in the service of their utopian and self-aggrandizing beliefs. You know, and you pointed out some mechanisms there. Its like, well, what does it cost an elite young woman whos at Yale, whos highly likelylets say shes above average in attractiveness, you know, shes bright, she comes from a family thats doing well, shes intelligent, shes going to get marriedit costs her nothing to claim that her compassion is so overwhelming that shes willing to accept anyones disgraceful behavior in principle. It costs her absolutely nothing. The price is definitely paid by the truly poor.
And it does happen from the bottom up, right? And you know why? Because the farther down you go in a hierarchy of status and reputation, the more stress there is.
Rob Henderson: Yes.
: Yes.
Jordan Peterson: And so if you increase the amount of chaos, you knock off the bottom people. And that accounts for that cascade you described earlier, where fatherlessness emerged first in the black community and then spread very widely. Then exactly the same thing started to happen in the Hispanic community from the bottom of the economic hierarchy upward. Then it started to happen in the Caucasian population, but the endpoint appearsif you map out the trendsthat there will be fewer and fewer people in stable relationships. Its happening incredibly fast. But the people in those relationships, they pay no price whatsoever for expanding their tolerance to include all forms of behavior that work to undermine that necessary stability. And they wont even admit that. They just call it thats just called well, thats your arbitrary moral judgment. All families are equal.
: And so if you increase the amount of chaos, you knock off the bottom people. And that accounts for that cascade you described earlier, where fatherlessness emerged first in the black community and then spread very widely. Then exactly the same thing started to happen in the Hispanic community from the bottom of the economic hierarchy upward. Then it started to happen in the Caucasian population, but the endpoint appearsif you map out the trendsthat there will be fewer and fewer people in stable relationships. Its happening incredibly fast. But the people in those relationships, they pay no price whatsoever for expanding their tolerance to include all forms of behavior that work to undermine that necessary stability. And they wont even admit that. They just call it thats just called well, thats your arbitrary moral judgment. All families are equal.
And thats another place where you undoubtedly got in trouble with your book. So maybe we could close with this, because one of the things you do thats quite striking in your book isand I think this is where well take the conversation for everyone watching and listeningI think this is where well continue the conversation on The Daily Wire side. You are a poster boy, so to speak, for the utility of pursuing higher education. Youve had quite marked success, partly because you had skills and abilities that werent exhausted by the situations you found yourself in, even within the military, and you got access to higher education. You likely have a pretty decent academic future ahead of you, by the looks of things. But you make the case very clearly that, as far as youre concerned, and from what youve observed, education is no substitute for the stability of family.
So why dont you talk about that for a bit, and then well bring this to a close?
Rob Henderson: Theres this question of how to achieve more upward social mobility for kids in deprived and dysfunctional circumstances. And for the last few decades, weve been focusing on education and college as the end-all and be-all. The idea is that if we could just get more kids to get more degrees, earn higher incomes, and join the middle class, thats the mark of a successful society. And I make the claimas someone who has done pretty well educationally but had very tumultuous experiences with different familiesthat actually, I think the family piece is more important than the education piece.
: Theres this question of how to achieve more upward social mobility for kids in deprived and dysfunctional circumstances. And for the last few decades, weve been focusing on education and college as the end-all and be-all. The idea is that if we could just get more kids to get more degrees, earn higher incomes, and join the middle class, thats the mark of a successful society. And I make the claimas someone who has done pretty well educationally but had very tumultuous experiences with different familiesthat actually, I think the family piece is more important than the education piece.
Even if we wanted more kids to go to college and obtain degrees, we would be more effective in achieving that goal if we looked at what happens before the age of 18, rather than after. If you look at the predictors of going to college, one of them is having two parents at home. Thats one of the strongest predictors of going on to obtain a bachelors degree. And so, even if the goal is bachelors degreesfinebut lets look at how to promote stable, two-parent homes.
When I think back to the guys I grew up with, and the community I lived in, I had five close friends growing up. Two of them went to prison, I had one friend who was shot. College may not have been the right path for those guys. College isnt the right path for everyone. But regardless of environment, wherever you put these guys, Im not entirely convinced that they would have gone on to achieve astounding educational success. But I do think that if they had been in an environment where there was more family stability, good role models, adults putting the needs of children before their own desires, they wouldnt have been incarcerated. They wouldnt have been shot to death.
So, we may not be able to do much to raise the ceiling for a lot of kids, but I think we could do more to raise the floor as far as how catastrophically down they fall. I know youre aware of the research on the limitations of increasing intelligence and academic ability. There are hard limits to that. But I dont think weve done enough to look at the other side of it, which is: we can actually prevent young boys, especially, from incarceration, from being locked up.
One of the statistics I cite in the book is that only 3% of children in foster care graduate from college, whereas 60% of boys in foster care are later incarcerated. Ultimately, the book is a kind of implicit defense of family from an author who really didnt have one. We could be expanding our area of concern beyond just the educational realm.
Im grateful to have achieved the success that I have. Its better than not having those things. But towards the end of the book, I do say that when I think back to the good memories I had from my upbringing yeah, I would trade all of it. I would trade all of the educational credentials and accolades and so on, to have just had a more stable, normal, conventional upbringing.
Jordan Peterson: And I think well delve into that a bit more. Okay, well, thank you very much. And for all of you watching and listening,Troubledis a very interesting book, and I think it gets the meta-story right. Weve wrestled with this issue, for example, at this Alliance for Responsible Citizenship that Ive been building with some other people. And one of the more contentious streams of discussion weve had was with regard to family policy. And we settled on the agreement, hard-fought, that the nuclear family is the minimal ideal that can sustain society. It might not even be sufficient; theres a lot of stress on nuclear familiesit might not be enough. But once you fragment below nuclear family, youre playing with fire. Youre playing with serious fire.
: And I think well delve into that a bit more. Okay, well, thank you very much. And for all of you watching and listening,
is a very interesting book, and I think it gets the meta-story right. Weve wrestled with this issue, for example, at this Alliance for Responsible Citizenship that Ive been building with some other people. And one of the more contentious streams of discussion weve had was with regard to family policy. And we settled on the agreement, hard-fought, that the nuclear family is the minimal ideal that can sustain society. It might not even be sufficient; theres a lot of stress on nuclear familiesit might not be enough. But once you fragment below nuclear family, youre playing with fire. Youre playing with serious fire.
You know, and theres a dark side too, to that luxury belief thing. You might think that people want wealth for comfort and opportunity, but they also want wealth for comparative status. And its very advantageous for the psychopathic wealthy to ensure that the fragmented masses are so chaotic that they dont get to have what the rich have, right? Because a lot of status is having something that someone else doesnt have. Its not the same as wealth, right? And so real psychopath typeswell, you know, there is literature showing a relationship between the dark tetrad and imagine this: you could imagine a situation where heres the dealyou can have your salary doubled, but your friends have their salaries tripled, right?
Rob Henderson: Right.
: Right.
Jordan Peterson: Or, you can and you can contrast that against relative deprivation conditions, where your relative status is elevated at the cost of other peoples well-being. Well, the psychopathic narcissist types will pick the elevation of relative status at the cost of other people. And I think thats why they spend so much time looking upward. Its very interesting that eat the rich is a more popular slogan than feed the poor, right?
: Or, you can and you can contrast that against relative deprivation conditions, where your relative status is elevated at the cost of other peoples well-being. Well, the psychopathic narcissist types will pick the elevation of relative status at the cost of other people. And I think thats why they spend so much time looking upward. Its very interesting that eat the rich is a more popular slogan than feed the poor, right?
Rob Henderson: Yes, yes. Because it is about that relative status. And the people who say eat the rich tend to be people who maybe theyre not in the 1%, but theyre in the top 10%. The people who are the most adamant about oppressor-oppressed dichotomies and so ontheyre not the people at the bottom. They are people who are just below the top.
: Yes, yes. Because it is about that relative status. And the people who say eat the rich tend to be people who maybe theyre not in the 1%, but theyre in the top 10%. The people who are the most adamant about oppressor-oppressed dichotomies and so ontheyre not the people at the bottom. They are people who are just below the top.
Jordan Peterson: Yeah, yeah. Well, and its eat the rich is a lie. Its eat the competent. Thats really what they mean.
: Yeah, yeah. Well, and its eat the rich is a lie. Its eat the competent. Thats really what they mean.
Rob Henderson: Yeah, yeah.
: Yeah, yeah.
Jordan Peterson: And thats the real rallying cry of the real narcissistic psychopath. Its like, Devour the competent. And you know, when you sayif I say to someone whos competent, You just got everything you have by stealing it, that means its perfectlynot only is it legitimate for me to steal it if Im oppressed, its actually morally obligatory for me to steal it. Right? Thats a very dangerous situation. Thats exactly what was set up in the early Soviet Union. Exactly that. And psychopaths came out of the woodwork, man. And they just turned that whole society into hell.
: And thats the real rallying cry of the real narcissistic psychopath. Its like, Devour the competent. And you know, when you sayif I say to someone whos competent, You just got everything you have by stealing it, that means its perfectlynot only is it legitimate for me to steal it if Im oppressed, its actually morally obligatory for me to steal it. Right? Thats a very dangerous situation. Thats exactly what was set up in the early Soviet Union. Exactly that. And psychopaths came out of the woodwork, man. And they just turned that whole society into hell.
Rob Henderson: Yeah, yeah. Same thing in Maos China, and in the Cambodian genocide. I mean, if you want I mean, this kind of veers off topic, but the Cambodian genocide is fascinating because they basically speedran communism and compressed all the horrors of the Soviet Union into about three years. And they killed a third of the countrys population. Horrifying.
: Yeah, yeah. Same thing in Maos China, and in the Cambodian genocide. I mean, if you want I mean, this kind of veers off topic, but the Cambodian genocide is fascinating because they basically speedran communism and compressed all the horrors of the Soviet Union into about three years. And they killed a third of the countrys population. Horrifying.
Jordan Peterson: I mean, yeah, its absurd that we dont have more education around what happened in communist societies, but thats yeah, on an aside. It is quite the stunning miracle of stupidity, thats for sure. All right, sir. Well, thank you to everyone watching and listening to this discussion today. And thank you very much, Rob. Its a pleasure talking to you. Im glad to hear that, despite the fact that you dont get to do a book tour, at least not to bookstores, that your book is doing well. And I think it will continue to do well. So, hopefully, this podcast will help to some degree with that. And everybody watching and listening, thank you very much for your time and attention, and to The Daily Wire Plus people for making this possible, thats also much appreciated. Good to talk to you.
: I mean, yeah, its absurd that we dont have more education around what happened in communist societies, but thats yeah, on an aside. It is quite the stunning miracle of stupidity, thats for sure. All right, sir. Well, thank you to everyone watching and listening to this discussion today. And thank you very much, Rob. Its a pleasure talking to you. Im glad to hear that, despite the fact that you dont get to do a book tour, at least not to bookstores, that your book is doing well. And I think it will continue to do well. So, hopefully, this podcast will help to some degree with that. And everybody watching and listening, thank you very much for your time and attention, and to The Daily Wire Plus people for making this possible, thats also much appreciated. Good to talk to you.
Rob Henderson: Thank you, Dr. Peterson. Its a pleasure.
: Thank you, Dr. Peterson. Its a pleasure.
Comments
Restacks
Its Just Me Dad
Its Just Me Dad
Oct 3
One of the things the military did, and what good parenting and mentorship do, is contain that energy so that, once the young person reaches the point where they can reflect and consider the future, you shepherd them to that point. Then they can think about their own future and what they want for their lives.
One of the things the military did, and what good parenting and mentorship do, is contain that energy so that, once the young person reaches the point where they can reflect and consider the future, you shepherd them to that point. Then they can think about their own future and what they want for their lives.
excellent point, the shepherding is really key. Fathers need to STEP IT UP.
excellent point, the shepherding is really key. Fathers need to STEP IT UP.
Like (4)
Reply
Share
Eric Jeker
Eric Jeker
Eric Jeker
Eric Jeker
Eric Jeker
Oct 3
Really love the fact you are talking about narrative. I fell in love with Byung-Chul Han and his book The Crisis of Narration that describe the problem with this lack of narrative in our post-modern society. It really gives a different perspective on what's happening when we form our identities through comformism with social media instead of our own stories and experience.
Really love the fact you are talking about narrative. I fell in love with Byung-Chul Han and his book The Crisis of Narration that describe the problem with this lack of narrative in our post-modern society. It really gives a different perspective on what's happening when we form our identities through comformism with social media instead of our own stories and experience.
Like (2)
Reply
Share
Top
Latest
Discussions

Rob Henderson

Rob Henderson

Rob Henderson

Rob Henderson

Rob Henderson

Rob Henderson

Rob Henderson

Rob Henderson

Rob Henderson

Rob Henderson


undefined subscriptions will be displayed on your profile (edit)
Skip for now
For your security, we need to re-authenticate you.
Click the link we sent to sasha.p.podolsky@gmail.com, orclick here to sign in.