

1
Book meeting
Book a meeting
Below is a transcript, lightly edited, with some highlights from my appearance on This Jungian Life.
We spoke about Jungian psychology, status symbols, the heros journey, my recent visit to Carl Jungs house in Switzerland,Troubled, and much more. Speaking about my book with 3 seasoned Jungian analysts was a truly unique experience. Enjoy:
We spoke about Jungian psychology, status symbols, the heros journey, my recent visit to Carl Jungs house in Switzerland,
, and much more. Speaking about my book with 3 seasoned Jungian analysts was a truly unique experience. Enjoy:
Deborah Stewart:Today, we have with us a guest, his name is Rob Henderson, and he is the bestselling author ofTroubled: A Memoir of Foster Care, Family, and Social Class.He grew up in foster homes in Los Angeles and the rural town of Red Bluff, California. He enlisted in the Air Force at the age of 17 and subsequently attended Yale on the GI Bill. He was then awarded a Gates Cambridge Scholarship to study at the University of Cambridge, where he obtained a PhD in Psychology in 2022. His writing has appeared in the New York Times, Wall Street Journal, and The Boston Globe, among other outlets, and his newsletter is sent each week to more than 60,000 subscribers. Welcome, Rob.
Today, we have with us a guest, his name is Rob Henderson, and he is the bestselling author of
He grew up in foster homes in Los Angeles and the rural town of Red Bluff, California. He enlisted in the Air Force at the age of 17 and subsequently attended Yale on the GI Bill. He was then awarded a Gates Cambridge Scholarship to study at the University of Cambridge, where he obtained a PhD in Psychology in 2022. His writing has appeared in the New York Times, Wall Street Journal, and The Boston Globe, among other outlets, and his newsletter is sent each week to more than 60,000 subscribers. Welcome, Rob.
Rob Henderson:Thank you, thank you, Deb. Thanks, Lisa and Joseph. It's great to be here.
Thank you, thank you, Deb. Thanks, Lisa and Joseph. It's great to be here.
Lisa Marchiano:Well, I had your book on my virtual nightstand for a long time, Rob. I'd been looking forward to its publication, and then I follow you on what used to be called Twitter and noticed that you were reading Jung. I thought, well, this is going to be a really interesting conversation. So, I thought we could kind of talk about the intersection of your interests, your research interests, and what you've been writing on in the past several years, as well as your personal experience and Jungian psychology, and see what veins there are to mine there.
Well, I had your book on my virtual nightstand for a long time, Rob. I'd been looking forward to its publication, and then I follow you on what used to be called Twitter and noticed that you were reading Jung. I thought, well, this is going to be a really interesting conversation. So, I thought we could kind of talk about the intersection of your interests, your research interests, and what you've been writing on in the past several years, as well as your personal experience and Jungian psychology, and see what veins there are to mine there.
Rob Henderson:I've been dipping in and out of Jung for maybe the last year, year and a half. I find it fascinating. It's such a different way of understanding the human mind than what I'm used to, coming out of academic psychology. I've become curious about going back to the roots of where psychology startedback to the psychoanalysts, back to Freud, back to Jungand seeing what I can glean from these pioneering thinkers.
I've been dipping in and out of Jung for maybe the last year, year and a half. I find it fascinating. It's such a different way of understanding the human mind than what I'm used to, coming out of academic psychology. I've become curious about going back to the roots of where psychology startedback to the psychoanalysts, back to Freud, back to Jungand seeing what I can glean from these pioneering thinkers.
Lisa Marchiano:Would you mind just telling us a little bit about what your research focus is or what your work has been focused on? Just tell us a little bit about that from the other side of the psychology field.
Would you mind just telling us a little bit about what your research focus is or what your work has been focused on? Just tell us a little bit about that from the other side of the psychology field.
Rob Henderson:I did a PhD at the University of Cambridge, studying social personality, and evolutionary psychology. My PhD thesis was building on some of the work from Jonathan Haidt in moral psychology, moral foundations theory. That period, in the midst of my PhD, the pandemic was ongoing, and so I became interested in the relationship between COVID, disgust, and morality, and those kinds of things. I was working on my PhD during that time, ran some studies, did the analyses, wrote up the results, got a couple of peer-reviewed papers published in academic journals. Throughout this time, I was also reading a lot about social class, social status, this preoccupation people tend to have for being held in high regard by other people, where that stems from, and how this feeling, this desire, seems to be more pronounced in some people than others. There were two papers that were published when I was still a student. These were both published, I believe, in 2020, and both of these papers found that essentially, the higher status, the higher social class people are, the stronger their desire for wealth and status. So, these researchers collected objective measures of one's position in societywealth, income, occupational prestige, level of educationand then asked participants questions like, "To what extent do you agree with statements like, 'It would please me to be in a position of power over others,' 'I enjoy when people look up when I enter a room,' and so on." Essentially, the higher people scored on those objective measures, the more likely they were to agree with those statements about being interested in power and recognition, and so on. That helped me to put some of the puzzle pieces together as far as what I was seeing at particularly elite university campusesplaces like Cambridge, places like Yalewhere I had come from a completely different environment before setting foot on campus. So, of course, I was interested in psychology and social class and status from an intellectual standpoint, but also from a personal one as well, given my experiences traveling along the class ladder.
I did a PhD at the University of Cambridge, studying social personality, and evolutionary psychology. My PhD thesis was building on some of the work from Jonathan Haidt in moral psychology, moral foundations theory. That period, in the midst of my PhD, the pandemic was ongoing, and so I became interested in the relationship between COVID, disgust, and morality, and those kinds of things. I was working on my PhD during that time, ran some studies, did the analyses, wrote up the results, got a couple of peer-reviewed papers published in academic journals. Throughout this time, I was also reading a lot about social class, social status, this preoccupation people tend to have for being held in high regard by other people, where that stems from, and how this feeling, this desire, seems to be more pronounced in some people than others. There were two papers that were published when I was still a student. These were both published, I believe, in 2020, and both of these papers found that essentially, the higher status, the higher social class people are, the stronger their desire for wealth and status. So, these researchers collected objective measures of one's position in societywealth, income, occupational prestige, level of educationand then asked participants questions like, "To what extent do you agree with statements like, 'It would please me to be in a position of power over others,' 'I enjoy when people look up when I enter a room,' and so on." Essentially, the higher people scored on those objective measures, the more likely they were to agree with those statements about being interested in power and recognition, and so on. That helped me to put some of the puzzle pieces together as far as what I was seeing at particularly elite university campusesplaces like Cambridge, places like Yalewhere I had come from a completely different environment before setting foot on campus. So, of course, I was interested in psychology and social class and status from an intellectual standpoint, but also from a personal one as well, given my experiences traveling along the class ladder.
Joseph Lee:Rob, this may be a good time to just offer to our readers a little bit of your story that you captured in your bookTroubled. Some of the listeners may not have necessarily read your book, and that might contextualize some of your comments. I know this is rather difficult to create a synopsis of such a large arc, but can you tell us a little bit about the book?
Rob, this may be a good time to just offer to our readers a little bit of your story that you captured in your book
. Some of the listeners may not have necessarily read your book, and that might contextualize some of your comments. I know this is rather difficult to create a synopsis of such a large arc, but can you tell us a little bit about the book?
Rob Henderson:My bookTroubledcame out in February, and it took about five or six years in total to get it published. I struggled a lot with it. I have these degrees from Cambridge and Yale. But before entering these elite universities, my life was a lot different. I was born in Los Angeles into poverty. Never knew my father. My mother and I were homeless for a time shortly after I was born. We lived in a car. Eventually, we settled in this slum apartment in LA, and my mom became heavily addicted to drugs. When I was 3 years old, I was taken from her care and placed into the Los Angeles County foster care system, where I lived in seven different homes and was eventually adopted. I fled as soon as I could, enlisting in the military when I was 17. I learned a lot while I served. Eventually found my way into Yale on the GI Bill. I've had a lot of unusual life experiences for someone with the educational pedigree that I have, and I spend quite a bit of time sharing my observations and reflections on social mobility in my book.
My book
came out in February, and it took about five or six years in total to get it published. I struggled a lot with it. I have these degrees from Cambridge and Yale. But before entering these elite universities, my life was a lot different. I was born in Los Angeles into poverty. Never knew my father. My mother and I were homeless for a time shortly after I was born. We lived in a car. Eventually, we settled in this slum apartment in LA, and my mom became heavily addicted to drugs. When I was 3 years old, I was taken from her care and placed into the Los Angeles County foster care system, where I lived in seven different homes and was eventually adopted. I fled as soon as I could, enlisting in the military when I was 17. I learned a lot while I served. Eventually found my way into Yale on the GI Bill. I've had a lot of unusual life experiences for someone with the educational pedigree that I have, and I spend quite a bit of time sharing my observations and reflections on social mobility in my book.
Joseph Lee:Before we started recording, Rob, you mentioned the heros journey and that someone had pointed out to you that it was a template for your experiences. Do you identify with that? Is that something that speaks to you?
Before we started recording, Rob, you mentioned the heros journey and that someone had pointed out to you that it was a template for your experiences. Do you identify with that? Is that something that speaks to you?
Rob Henderson:A friend of mine read a very rough draft of theTroubledmanuscript, and he said, "Rob, this is a classic heros journey." I asked him what that was, and he referenced Joseph Campbell. I readHero with a Thousand Faces. That was one of the avenues that took me to Jung. I realized that the heros journey ideaCampbell popularized it, but he was drawing on ideas that were original to Jung. I dont know if I identify with it, because it seems so fantastical. I have difficulty connecting more mythical and fantastical elements to the concrete realities of my life. But over time I can see it. The connection between starting in one place and ending up in anothereven at the very end of my book where I attempt to "return with the elixir." I didnt know this is what I was doing. But I was unknowingly following that heros journey sequence of "What did I learn through all of this? Heres the informationthe 'treasure'that Ive discovered," that kind of thing.
A friend of mine read a very rough draft of the
manuscript, and he said, "Rob, this is a classic heros journey." I asked him what that was, and he referenced Joseph Campbell. I read
. That was one of the avenues that took me to Jung. I realized that the heros journey ideaCampbell popularized it, but he was drawing on ideas that were original to Jung. I dont know if I identify with it, because it seems so fantastical. I have difficulty connecting more mythical and fantastical elements to the concrete realities of my life. But over time I can see it. The connection between starting in one place and ending up in anothereven at the very end of my book where I attempt to "return with the elixir." I didnt know this is what I was doing. But I was unknowingly following that heros journey sequence of "What did I learn through all of this? Heres the informationthe 'treasure'that Ive discovered," that kind of thing.
Deborah Stewart:The heros journey is about getting out into the world. In mythology, it might be slaying the dragon or finding the water of life, the elixir. The flip side of the heros journey is the archetype of the orphan. These are universal human themes, both of those thingsfeeling alone and unseen, and "Am I going to make it?" Im not at all surprised that people relate to your journey because its part of so many inner world journeys. People who may have grown up in materially more fortunate circumstances nonetheless experience these universal human themes.
The heros journey is about getting out into the world. In mythology, it might be slaying the dragon or finding the water of life, the elixir. The flip side of the heros journey is the archetype of the orphan. These are universal human themes, both of those thingsfeeling alone and unseen, and "Am I going to make it?" Im not at all surprised that people relate to your journey because its part of so many inner world journeys. People who may have grown up in materially more fortunate circumstances nonetheless experience these universal human themes.
Lisa Marchiano:To your comment about the archetype of the orphan, there was that one moment, I think it was when you were...the woman who made you clean the poolwas that Miss Martinez? She was a really Dickensian kind of villain. You describe a neighbor walking by, sort of checking in on you, and then just continuing to walk, and you had this realization: "Im really alone." I think Im recalling that correctly, right?
To your comment about the archetype of the orphan, there was that one moment, I think it was when you were...the woman who made you clean the poolwas that Miss Martinez? She was a really Dickensian kind of villain. You describe a neighbor walking by, sort of checking in on you, and then just continuing to walk, and you had this realization: "Im really alone." I think Im recalling that correctly, right?
Rob Henderson:Yeah.
Yeah.
Lisa Marchiano:That moment, I think, that youre getting to, Debthat kind of existential awareness of our aloneness in the world, which is a terrible thing to have to feel, as you did, Rob, as a young child. Yet, there is something about knowing that that can set us on a path because we recognize that were the only ones who are going to make a difference in our lives. So, there can be a way that its clarifying to know that.
That moment, I think, that youre getting to, Debthat kind of existential awareness of our aloneness in the world, which is a terrible thing to have to feel, as you did, Rob, as a young child. Yet, there is something about knowing that that can set us on a path because we recognize that were the only ones who are going to make a difference in our lives. So, there can be a way that its clarifying to know that.
Joseph Lee:I feel like were trying to create some kind of a bridge from Robs narrative, his autobiography, with some Jungian concepts. Hes done a bit of that work for us by talking about the heros myth. In a nutshell, the heros myth, in general, is that movement from dependency upon a parental figure to full autonomy and gaining whatever skills one needs in order to be in the world effectively and dynamically. The heros journey in some ways is appropriate inasmuch as some of the archetypal scenes of struggle, which to many modern psyches dont seem relevant, are very relevant to people who have been raised in traumatizing environments. In many of the myths, the hero is struggling for their lifetheyre struggling against monsters, struggling against adversity that most modern folks couldnt necessarily imagine. But when were raised in very adverse environments, its not uncommon for a child to be fighting for their lifefighting to get enough food, fighting to get away from a monstrous adult. What does one need to find in order to either escape or overcome those experiences?
I feel like were trying to create some kind of a bridge from Robs narrative, his autobiography, with some Jungian concepts. Hes done a bit of that work for us by talking about the heros myth. In a nutshell, the heros myth, in general, is that movement from dependency upon a parental figure to full autonomy and gaining whatever skills one needs in order to be in the world effectively and dynamically. The heros journey in some ways is appropriate inasmuch as some of the archetypal scenes of struggle, which to many modern psyches dont seem relevant, are very relevant to people who have been raised in traumatizing environments. In many of the myths, the hero is struggling for their lifetheyre struggling against monsters, struggling against adversity that most modern folks couldnt necessarily imagine. But when were raised in very adverse environments, its not uncommon for a child to be fighting for their lifefighting to get enough food, fighting to get away from a monstrous adult. What does one need to find in order to either escape or overcome those experiences?
When I think about some of the things that you described in your book, as you were saying, you wondered whether anybody could identify. For instance, having a mother who just ties you to a chair and leaves you for extended periods of timefor some people, that seems like a strange, horrible myth, but it isnt. But often in these ancient myths, those stories of remarkable challenges remain. It often is in that mythic realm that we can still have a feeling for extraordinary adversity that is overcome. The triumph of the hero is that he is often wounded, but he wins inasmuch as he emerges potent enough, accomplished enough, and able to command some sense of success and autonomy in the world, and not become a monster himself. That is one of the terrible challenges, of coursechildren are always at risk of becoming what has been done to them, to become their adversaries. We see that sometimes in these shows likeBatmanor Marvel Comics. Why does Batman, whos been subject to terrible things, decide hes going to be a hero versus many of the criminals, the dark figures, who were exposed to terrible things and became nefarious and dangerous? Often its the heros archetype, Jung might say, that activates inside of the human psyche and provides a frame of meaning that points a way out of overidentifying with the adversity. It points to this feeling of overcoming the adversary instead of becoming the adversary. In that way, it provides a kind of psychological shield so that eventually we select what is betterultimately more functional, also better in terms of how to situate in the social environment.
When I think about some of the things that you described in your book, as you were saying, you wondered whether anybody could identify. For instance, having a mother who just ties you to a chair and leaves you for extended periods of timefor some people, that seems like a strange, horrible myth, but it isnt. But often in these ancient myths, those stories of remarkable challenges remain. It often is in that mythic realm that we can still have a feeling for extraordinary adversity that is overcome. The triumph of the hero is that he is often wounded, but he wins inasmuch as he emerges potent enough, accomplished enough, and able to command some sense of success and autonomy in the world, and not become a monster himself. That is one of the terrible challenges, of coursechildren are always at risk of becoming what has been done to them, to become their adversaries. We see that sometimes in these shows like
or Marvel Comics. Why does Batman, whos been subject to terrible things, decide hes going to be a hero versus many of the criminals, the dark figures, who were exposed to terrible things and became nefarious and dangerous? Often its the heros archetype, Jung might say, that activates inside of the human psyche and provides a frame of meaning that points a way out of overidentifying with the adversity. It points to this feeling of overcoming the adversary instead of becoming the adversary. In that way, it provides a kind of psychological shield so that eventually we select what is betterultimately more functional, also better in terms of how to situate in the social environment.
Deb pointed out perhaps the archetype of the orphan, which we also see in fairy tales and mythsthe journey from deprivation and isolation to relationship. The heroic journey of the orphan is to go from being alone to being coupled, to forging the relationships that were not demonstrated in childhood. We discover we can attach, we can want someone close to us, rather than recoil in fear that theyre going to do something terrible to us. Thats the orphans hero journeythe ability to love and be loved, which is something some people can take for granted. But for those who have not had that demonstrated to them, that is a heroic featto love and be loved. These universal stories can illuminate certain tasks, and I would suspect, reading your book, that some of these themes could interestingly lean into your narrative as they do to all who have overcome remarkable adversity.
Rob Henderson:One thing that came to mind as you were speaking, Joseph, iswe mentioned the hero's journey and how I had some difficulty connecting those mythical and fantastical elements to the more concrete realities that I'm describing in my book. But I wonder if these myths, these stories, are written as a way to communicate these kinds of traumatic realities in a more palatable and less traumatic form. One piece of feedback I get from some readers is how difficult it is for them to read about a child being mistreated by an adult. I understand that. But if you're reading about a story of a child fighting a dragon or something, it's the same story archetype, but it is less upsetting to read. I wonder if myth serves that purpose.
One thing that came to mind as you were speaking, Joseph, iswe mentioned the hero's journey and how I had some difficulty connecting those mythical and fantastical elements to the more concrete realities that I'm describing in my book. But I wonder if these myths, these stories, are written as a way to communicate these kinds of traumatic realities in a more palatable and less traumatic form. One piece of feedback I get from some readers is how difficult it is for them to read about a child being mistreated by an adult. I understand that. But if you're reading about a story of a child fighting a dragon or something, it's the same story archetype, but it is less upsetting to read. I wonder if myth serves that purpose.
Lisa Marchiano:I think in a way it kind of translates it into a higher register, which makes it universal. So it's not just a single person's story of triumphing over adversity; it's the potential of the human spirit to triumph over adversity. It also makes it mythological and therefore symbolic, so we're in a realm that has a lot of resonance rather than just being the concrete story. There are layers of meaning there because it's symbolic. I think it does make it more palatable in a way, or like a way to find a way in, but also feels relevant to all of us.
I think in a way it kind of translates it into a higher register, which makes it universal. So it's not just a single person's story of triumphing over adversity; it's the potential of the human spirit to triumph over adversity. It also makes it mythological and therefore symbolic, so we're in a realm that has a lot of resonance rather than just being the concrete story. There are layers of meaning there because it's symbolic. I think it does make it more palatable in a way, or like a way to find a way in, but also feels relevant to all of us.
Deborah Stewart:It depersonalizes it by making it universal and consequently can be looked at in the same way that all metaphor, in a sense, is slightly distancing. It can expand the language around how we can describe an experience, but it also gives us a little bit of a buffer when we say, "Oh, it's just like this." Well, we're slightly moving a few inches away from the thing, which can give us a poetic shield around the rawness of the actual experience.
It depersonalizes it by making it universal and consequently can be looked at in the same way that all metaphor, in a sense, is slightly distancing. It can expand the language around how we can describe an experience, but it also gives us a little bit of a buffer when we say, "Oh, it's just like this." Well, we're slightly moving a few inches away from the thing, which can give us a poetic shield around the rawness of the actual experience.
Joseph Lee:Also, myths and fairy tales survive because there is something in the story that most human beings still resonate with. So many things disappear that we can't imagine from a thousand years agostories that were told. Why do a handful of these stories seem to propagate from culture to culture for a thousand years? It must be something that the general human personality can recognize as a universal. Often it's because myths and fairy tales also solve something on that symbolic level, whether it's the capacity to hold on to hope in hopeless situations or the ability to aspire. There's a wonderful quote that I like by an essayist called Chesterton, and he writes, "Fairy tales do not tell children that dragons exist. Children already know that dragons exist. Fairy tales tell children the dragons can be killed."
Also, myths and fairy tales survive because there is something in the story that most human beings still resonate with. So many things disappear that we can't imagine from a thousand years agostories that were told. Why do a handful of these stories seem to propagate from culture to culture for a thousand years? It must be something that the general human personality can recognize as a universal. Often it's because myths and fairy tales also solve something on that symbolic level, whether it's the capacity to hold on to hope in hopeless situations or the ability to aspire. There's a wonderful quote that I like by an essayist called Chesterton, and he writes, "Fairy tales do not tell children that dragons exist. Children already know that dragons exist. Fairy tales tell children the dragons can be killed."
Rob Henderson:Right.
Right.
Joseph Lee:So it gives us an orientation in that mythic worldthe possibilities that a child might not imagine. So as you are tied up in that chair, you are Hansel inHansel and Gretelwhere the witch has put you in a cage, and you're wondering how you're going to get out of the cage in the witch's cottage. There are universalsthis idea of children feeling bound and trapped is something that shows up in fairy tales that are hundreds, if not a thousand, years old because it is a thing that happens, either symbolically or quite literally in the world. How does the human spirit orient to that so that we can find a way out of even the memory of it, let alone the actual physical experience? And of course, you are charting that and have been charting it, and your story is a way of getting through theHansel and Gretelstory without being eaten by the witch. So these metaphors of fairy taleswe can find threads that allow us to hold and to imagine it even from a somewhat different aesthetic.
So it gives us an orientation in that mythic worldthe possibilities that a child might not imagine. So as you are tied up in that chair, you are Hansel in
where the witch has put you in a cage, and you're wondering how you're going to get out of the cage in the witch's cottage. There are universalsthis idea of children feeling bound and trapped is something that shows up in fairy tales that are hundreds, if not a thousand, years old because it is a thing that happens, either symbolically or quite literally in the world. How does the human spirit orient to that so that we can find a way out of even the memory of it, let alone the actual physical experience? And of course, you are charting that and have been charting it, and your story is a way of getting through the
story without being eaten by the witch. So these metaphors of fairy taleswe can find threads that allow us to hold and to imagine it even from a somewhat different aesthetic.
Deborah Stewart:Theres such a link between the individual and the universal stories. Fairy tales and various mythological themes can seem outlandish and out there, but over and over again, as we see in an individual story like your book, the theme of "You can do it," its a theme of empowerment. You have the right stuff. You can do it. Conquer the witch or Cinderella goes to the ball. Its this sense of empowering different facets of empowerment that are within us. Thats whatits in you, whoever that "you" happens to be. What Joseph said about that building hope.
Theres such a link between the individual and the universal stories. Fairy tales and various mythological themes can seem outlandish and out there, but over and over again, as we see in an individual story like your book, the theme of "You can do it," its a theme of empowerment. You have the right stuff. You can do it. Conquer the witch or Cinderella goes to the ball. Its this sense of empowering different facets of empowerment that are within us. Thats whatits in you, whoever that "you" happens to be. What Joseph said about that building hope.
Joseph Lee:Given the breadth of your experience and also the suffering that you had overcome, why do you think that you had focused on this idea of status, opportunity, luxury beliefs? For instance, you could easily have decided that research into trauma or childhood trauma equally would have been your purview, having experienced that. But what funneled your interest particularly into this kind of socioeconomic and privilege dynamic?
Given the breadth of your experience and also the suffering that you had overcome, why do you think that you had focused on this idea of status, opportunity, luxury beliefs? For instance, you could easily have decided that research into trauma or childhood trauma equally would have been your purview, having experienced that. But what funneled your interest particularly into this kind of socioeconomic and privilege dynamic?
Rob Henderson:I had the experience of being born about as poor as you could be in a developed, first-world country. So, I started about as low as you can start in terms of socioeconomic status. By the time I was adopted, Id witnessed a working-class, lower-middle-class environment. Then, by the time I got to the military, I had kind of more middle-class friends. Then I got to Yale and had friends who were more upper-middle or upper class. So, I really saw the broadest spectrum of socioeconomic status that you could see in the US within a relatively short window of time. Along the way, I attempted to put these pieces together, these differences I was seeing. Not just in terms of money, but also in terms of family structure, cultural capital, social capitalwho gets access to what and who doesnt. In my own experience, you mentioned childhood traumathere's probably a piece there where I myself was seeking regard from other people because I had so little of it in the foster homes and in my early life. I mentioned in the book, I have two memories of my birth mother, but the body remembers, right? So even if I dont necessarily consciously have the experience of remembrance of my mother and all of our interactions before I was taken from her and placed into foster care when I was 3 years old, my guess is she was not exactly 100% present during those early years. In all of the foster homes, there were varying degrees of neglect. In my adoptive family, there was less-than-adequate supervision at home as well. Later, when I joined the military and achieved a bit of success for myself, I realized how I felt differently about myself, how other people looked at me, and I wanted to understand that too. What was that that led me to experience that transformation, and why? That seems to be such a fundamental drive for many people.
I had the experience of being born about as poor as you could be in a developed, first-world country. So, I started about as low as you can start in terms of socioeconomic status. By the time I was adopted, Id witnessed a working-class, lower-middle-class environment. Then, by the time I got to the military, I had kind of more middle-class friends. Then I got to Yale and had friends who were more upper-middle or upper class. So, I really saw the broadest spectrum of socioeconomic status that you could see in the US within a relatively short window of time. Along the way, I attempted to put these pieces together, these differences I was seeing. Not just in terms of money, but also in terms of family structure, cultural capital, social capitalwho gets access to what and who doesnt. In my own experience, you mentioned childhood traumathere's probably a piece there where I myself was seeking regard from other people because I had so little of it in the foster homes and in my early life. I mentioned in the book, I have two memories of my birth mother, but the body remembers, right? So even if I dont necessarily consciously have the experience of remembrance of my mother and all of our interactions before I was taken from her and placed into foster care when I was 3 years old, my guess is she was not exactly 100% present during those early years. In all of the foster homes, there were varying degrees of neglect. In my adoptive family, there was less-than-adequate supervision at home as well. Later, when I joined the military and achieved a bit of success for myself, I realized how I felt differently about myself, how other people looked at me, and I wanted to understand that too. What was that that led me to experience that transformation, and why? That seems to be such a fundamental drive for many people.
Deborah Stewart:It seems to me that in a way, what Joseph has articulated might be likened to two sides of a coinheads and tailsthat trauma and social class are very much intertwined. Poverty and lots of changes of caregivers, inadequate educational experiencesperhaps you could put anything you want into that categoryare, in effect, aspects of childhood trauma. They're not the only ones, but if you are living in a car or have had multiple caregivers through the foster "care" system, there's a relationship there.
It seems to me that in a way, what Joseph has articulated might be likened to two sides of a coinheads and tailsthat trauma and social class are very much intertwined. Poverty and lots of changes of caregivers, inadequate educational experiencesperhaps you could put anything you want into that categoryare, in effect, aspects of childhood trauma. They're not the only ones, but if you are living in a car or have had multiple caregivers through the foster "care" system, there's a relationship there.
Rob Henderson:Shortly before my first deployment, on a whimthis was my first step towards studying psychologyI picked up this book from the Harvard psychologist Steven Pinker. This was 2012, and the title got my attention. It was just calledHow the Mind Works, very simple title. I was 22 at that time. I thought, "Oh, how does the mind work?" I was about to go on a long flight and spend six months in another country and figured, "Oh, here's a thick, dense book that might occupy my time." There was a passage in there that I mentioned inTroubledabout how Pinker points out that, yeah, this is a fundamental drive, and he gives all the synonyms of status: esteem, recognition, prestige, regard, and so on. This is something that people long for and pursue. I wondered, because Pinker claimed it was universal, "Is it universal? In my case, it seems to be true." Once I started to learn about how you could actually study these things empirically, it led me down the path of studying it in a more formal way in college and then later in grad school.
Shortly before my first deployment, on a whimthis was my first step towards studying psychologyI picked up this book from the Harvard psychologist Steven Pinker. This was 2012, and the title got my attention. It was just called
, very simple title. I was 22 at that time. I thought, "Oh, how does the mind work?" I was about to go on a long flight and spend six months in another country and figured, "Oh, here's a thick, dense book that might occupy my time." There was a passage in there that I mentioned in
about how Pinker points out that, yeah, this is a fundamental drive, and he gives all the synonyms of status: esteem, recognition, prestige, regard, and so on. This is something that people long for and pursue. I wondered, because Pinker claimed it was universal, "Is it universal? In my case, it seems to be true." Once I started to learn about how you could actually study these things empirically, it led me down the path of studying it in a more formal way in college and then later in grad school.
Joseph Lee:Its interesting because we've had this national discourse on diversity, I feel like class has often dropped out of the discussion. Its refreshing to read about it. As I've been reading some about class in your book and in some other books too, I've felt very called out. I was sharing before we started recording, Rob, that you have this line in your book aboutyou're quoting from another authorabout how educated people like to name their pets things like Clytemnestra. I was like, "Oh man, that hits really close to home." It feels comfortable to me, for example, to want to name my pets after some literary allusion, without recognizing that what I'm doing is signaling prestige or class. Once it's pointed out to me, it's like, "Well, maybe your predilection for organic foods isnt just about wanting to eat healthy; maybe its also a signifier of class or prestige." So, I'm reaching for somethingI dont know that I'm landing on it, but I think you're right.
Its interesting because we've had this national discourse on diversity, I feel like class has often dropped out of the discussion. Its refreshing to read about it. As I've been reading some about class in your book and in some other books too, I've felt very called out. I was sharing before we started recording, Rob, that you have this line in your book aboutyou're quoting from another authorabout how educated people like to name their pets things like Clytemnestra. I was like, "Oh man, that hits really close to home." It feels comfortable to me, for example, to want to name my pets after some literary allusion, without recognizing that what I'm doing is signaling prestige or class. Once it's pointed out to me, it's like, "Well, maybe your predilection for organic foods isnt just about wanting to eat healthy; maybe its also a signifier of class or prestige." So, I'm reaching for somethingI dont know that I'm landing on it, but I think you're right.
Rob Henderson:I just had this conversation recently with a friend of mine. He's a professor, and he's on some diversity organization at his university. He told me the other day that everyone was discussing these different categories of diversity, and he brought up class. People politely nodded and then moved right back to talking about these other categories and really expressed no interest in pursuing more class diversity, which I find fascinating. I was shocked when I arrived at Yale at just how little interest there was in class and howof course, there are various forms of marginalization and victimization and so onbut I think for most people, if you had to choose, very few people would choose the one where you didnt actually have enough material resources. Being born poor is arguably the worst. So class seems to be particularly difficult to talk about. Another friend, a professor, studies social class, and he managed to collect these data from an elite business school. He recorded conversations among the students and their interactions and basically found that despite the various forms of marginalized identities, the students were relatively open in terms of describing their identities in terms of ethnicity, gender, sexual orientation, and so on. But he said the one category that the students very much avoided divulging was class. The wealthy students didnt want to talk about their wealth; the poor students didnt want to talk about their impoverished backgrounds. No one wants to talk about money, which I find fascinating. I think maybe it just stems from this American belief that class doesnt exist and that we're all kind ofwe're all middle class, you know?
I just had this conversation recently with a friend of mine. He's a professor, and he's on some diversity organization at his university. He told me the other day that everyone was discussing these different categories of diversity, and he brought up class. People politely nodded and then moved right back to talking about these other categories and really expressed no interest in pursuing more class diversity, which I find fascinating. I was shocked when I arrived at Yale at just how little interest there was in class and howof course, there are various forms of marginalization and victimization and so onbut I think for most people, if you had to choose, very few people would choose the one where you didnt actually have enough material resources. Being born poor is arguably the worst. So class seems to be particularly difficult to talk about. Another friend, a professor, studies social class, and he managed to collect these data from an elite business school. He recorded conversations among the students and their interactions and basically found that despite the various forms of marginalized identities, the students were relatively open in terms of describing their identities in terms of ethnicity, gender, sexual orientation, and so on. But he said the one category that the students very much avoided divulging was class. The wealthy students didnt want to talk about their wealth; the poor students didnt want to talk about their impoverished backgrounds. No one wants to talk about money, which I find fascinating. I think maybe it just stems from this American belief that class doesnt exist and that we're all kind ofwe're all middle class, you know?
Lisa Marchiano:Right, right. Its funnyjust to go back to Canada Goose jacketsI have a friend whose daughter was actually at Yale. My friend had actually been given, in some promotion or something that had to do with her job, a Canada Goose jacket. Her daughter needed a jacket, so my friend was like, "You know, take this jacket." Her daughter was like, "Mom, I cannot wear that," because it signified this sort of degree of elitism.
Right, right. Its funnyjust to go back to Canada Goose jacketsI have a friend whose daughter was actually at Yale. My friend had actually been given, in some promotion or something that had to do with her job, a Canada Goose jacket. Her daughter needed a jacket, so my friend was like, "You know, take this jacket." Her daughter was like, "Mom, I cannot wear that," because it signified this sort of degree of elitism.
Rob Henderson:Elitism, exactly.
Elitism, exactly.
Lisa Marchiano:Its like, do you want to signal that you have money? Because that's what most people have wanted to do throughout history. I actually love reading old novels from the 17th and 18th century, and a lot of those novels are all about who's got money and how do you know and how nice a house does Mr. Darcy have, and all of this stuff, right? There's a lot of that. So, it's always been with us, but nowadays, its almost fashionable not to signal that you have material advantage. So, its interesting.
Its like, do you want to signal that you have money? Because that's what most people have wanted to do throughout history. I actually love reading old novels from the 17th and 18th century, and a lot of those novels are all about who's got money and how do you know and how nice a house does Mr. Darcy have, and all of this stuff, right? There's a lot of that. So, it's always been with us, but nowadays, its almost fashionable not to signal that you have material advantage. So, its interesting.
Rob Henderson:I spent some time inTroubleddwelling on this point that class is not just about money. It is about these more subtle signifiersyour interests, your tastes, your hobbies, where you went to school, which university you graduated from, and what disciplines or majors you studied. Paul Fussell writes about this in his great bookClass: A Guide Through the American Status Systemthat the more "useless" the subject, the higher the class background. I noticed this when I was in collegethe students who were, for example, a disproportionate number of the ones headed off to medical school were from immigrant backgrounds. They knew that they were going to have a job as a physician, whereas the students who were legacies or comfortably upper middle class were interested in studying topics that didnt necessarily have a job waiting for them. I read this bookChina Rich Girlfriendby Kevin Kwan recently, the sequel toCrazy Rich Asians, which some listeners may be familiar with. It was a big movie that came out five or six years ago. This is the sequel to that; it's the novel. One of the points in the book is that one of the characters talks about how he always felt poor growing up, despite the fact that his family was obscenely wealthy. The reason, he said, is because they drove an old car, and their dishware had chipslittle imperfections, and their furniture was old. Later, someone had to explain to him, "No, that's how legacy wealth works. You have antique furniture, you have old dishware, you drive a beat-up carthat's just how you perform your class." Its similar in America too, where blue-blooded WASPs drive a BMW from 1998 and have frayed collars on their shirts. New money drives a Lexus, they wear flashy suits, and show off an expensive Rolex. With old money, they dont exhibit their class in that way.
I spent some time in
dwelling on this point that class is not just about money. It is about these more subtle signifiersyour interests, your tastes, your hobbies, where you went to school, which university you graduated from, and what disciplines or majors you studied. Paul Fussell writes about this in his great book
that the more "useless" the subject, the higher the class background. I noticed this when I was in collegethe students who were, for example, a disproportionate number of the ones headed off to medical school were from immigrant backgrounds. They knew that they were going to have a job as a physician, whereas the students who were legacies or comfortably upper middle class were interested in studying topics that didnt necessarily have a job waiting for them. I read this book
by Kevin Kwan recently, the sequel to
, which some listeners may be familiar with. It was a big movie that came out five or six years ago. This is the sequel to that; it's the novel. One of the points in the book is that one of the characters talks about how he always felt poor growing up, despite the fact that his family was obscenely wealthy. The reason, he said, is because they drove an old car, and their dishware had chipslittle imperfections, and their furniture was old. Later, someone had to explain to him, "No, that's how legacy wealth works. You have antique furniture, you have old dishware, you drive a beat-up carthat's just how you perform your class." Its similar in America too, where blue-blooded WASPs drive a BMW from 1998 and have frayed collars on their shirts. New money drives a Lexus, they wear flashy suits, and show off an expensive Rolex. With old money, they dont exhibit their class in that way.
Lisa Marchiano:Thats fascinating. I mean, this has always been with us, right? I think its true that we dont talk about it. One of the things thats been floating around the edges of our conversation, I feel like for the past few minutes, that Ill just go ahead and land is the association between Jungian psychology and class. Jung grew up, I would say, kind of middle classhis father was a pastor in a rural placebut he married the second richest woman in Switzerland and didnt have to worry about money after that. The group that grew around him, especially as he became more renowned, were very moneyed foreigners, many of them including the Mellons. Its very expensive to train to become an analyst; being in analysis is generally very expensive. Talk about the point you made earlier about fringe interestsI mean, boy, alchemy, anyone? So thats something I think Im aware of that operates in my little corner of the world, and Im kind of curious about.
Thats fascinating. I mean, this has always been with us, right? I think its true that we dont talk about it. One of the things thats been floating around the edges of our conversation, I feel like for the past few minutes, that Ill just go ahead and land is the association between Jungian psychology and class. Jung grew up, I would say, kind of middle classhis father was a pastor in a rural placebut he married the second richest woman in Switzerland and didnt have to worry about money after that. The group that grew around him, especially as he became more renowned, were very moneyed foreigners, many of them including the Mellons. Its very expensive to train to become an analyst; being in analysis is generally very expensive. Talk about the point you made earlier about fringe interestsI mean, boy, alchemy, anyone? So thats something I think Im aware of that operates in my little corner of the world, and Im kind of curious about.
Rob Henderson:Its expensive to become an analyst, and its expensive to receive the analysis as well. I had dinner the other day with a friend who was explaining to me that heso hes older, an older gentleman, ultra-high net worthand he was telling me, its interesting were having this conversation now because he told me he credits his financial success to psychoanalysis. He goes through the old school, like Freudian-style psychoanalysis, and I asked him, "Are you talking about laying on the couch, the whole thing?" He said, "Yes, thats right," and hes been doing it for 15, 20 years now. He says that allowed him to access parts of himself he was unaware of and made him a better businessman and so on. As he was explaining this to me, I did think that, because he came from a pretty well-off family to begin with and took what he had and made even more of it, if theres a causal link between psychoanalysis and earning lots of money, very few people would have the option to do the analysis in order to make the money in the first place, right? So, there are these barriers in place. Its the case for all forms of education, reallyhow difficult it is to acquire, and these invisible barriers.
Its expensive to become an analyst, and its expensive to receive the analysis as well. I had dinner the other day with a friend who was explaining to me that heso hes older, an older gentleman, ultra-high net worthand he was telling me, its interesting were having this conversation now because he told me he credits his financial success to psychoanalysis. He goes through the old school, like Freudian-style psychoanalysis, and I asked him, "Are you talking about laying on the couch, the whole thing?" He said, "Yes, thats right," and hes been doing it for 15, 20 years now. He says that allowed him to access parts of himself he was unaware of and made him a better businessman and so on. As he was explaining this to me, I did think that, because he came from a pretty well-off family to begin with and took what he had and made even more of it, if theres a causal link between psychoanalysis and earning lots of money, very few people would have the option to do the analysis in order to make the money in the first place, right? So, there are these barriers in place. Its the case for all forms of education, reallyhow difficult it is to acquire, and these invisible barriers.
Joseph Lee:As you have spent time through your personal experience and then also your education bringing forward the significance of status and class, I'd like you to talk at some point about luxury beliefs specifically, which is a wonderful term that you created to describe a phenomenon. Is this something that we must simply become aware of and accept, or do you have a sense that anything could be done, or even should be done, around this, secondary to being more aware of it?
As you have spent time through your personal experience and then also your education bringing forward the significance of status and class, I'd like you to talk at some point about luxury beliefs specifically, which is a wonderful term that you created to describe a phenomenon. Is this something that we must simply become aware of and accept, or do you have a sense that anything could be done, or even should be done, around this, secondary to being more aware of it?
Rob Henderson:Yeah, there was a great book on this topic a couple of years ago by Will Storr,The Status Game. He talks about three types of games that we play for status. He talks about dominance games, and this is the most archaic form of status competition. He cites animal researchexpressions of violence, bullying, coercion, and so on. He says that in the modern world, in polite society, we dont necessarily have as much of this, but you can see it in sports, street gangs, mafias, militaries, and this kind of thing. Then he talks about virtue games, essentially attempting to outdo others in terms of moral character. Some people might use the term "virtue signaling"how one is holier than thou. And he talks about success games, basically doing very well in your education and your career, obtaining awards and accolades, and so on. He says to varying degrees, were probably going to play at least one of these games in one form or another. I think we can be aware that we have this desire, but we can also be aware of which game we want to play as well. I dont necessarily think theres anything wrong with the virtue games of attempting to become a better version of yourself and improving the world, but on the luxury beliefs point, which maybe we could get into later, just because your intentions are good doesnt mean the outcomes are going to be good. Its very easy to mistake the warm glow you feel from expressing an opinion or attempting to implement a policy for how efficient and effective those policies will be. I think thats worth knowing as well. Ive likened this desire for status to something like hunger, where all of us, to varying degrees, experience hunger. The intensity varies from person to person, and how much we desire it variesfood, I mean. And its the same with status. I think it follows along that normal distribution where the intensity of that desire is different from person to person. For someone like me, Im interested in studying it, and my guess is people who are interested in studying something like this probably have a higher-than-average desire for it. Others dont. I noticed this with my friends that I grew up around from back home. Of course, they experience their own versions of status games and so on, but its not nearly to the same extent as I see among more educated people. Although its more subtle, its pervasive.
Yeah, there was a great book on this topic a couple of years ago by Will Storr,
. He talks about three types of games that we play for status. He talks about dominance games, and this is the most archaic form of status competition. He cites animal researchexpressions of violence, bullying, coercion, and so on. He says that in the modern world, in polite society, we dont necessarily have as much of this, but you can see it in sports, street gangs, mafias, militaries, and this kind of thing. Then he talks about virtue games, essentially attempting to outdo others in terms of moral character. Some people might use the term "virtue signaling"how one is holier than thou. And he talks about success games, basically doing very well in your education and your career, obtaining awards and accolades, and so on. He says to varying degrees, were probably going to play at least one of these games in one form or another. I think we can be aware that we have this desire, but we can also be aware of which game we want to play as well. I dont necessarily think theres anything wrong with the virtue games of attempting to become a better version of yourself and improving the world, but on the luxury beliefs point, which maybe we could get into later, just because your intentions are good doesnt mean the outcomes are going to be good. Its very easy to mistake the warm glow you feel from expressing an opinion or attempting to implement a policy for how efficient and effective those policies will be. I think thats worth knowing as well. Ive likened this desire for status to something like hunger, where all of us, to varying degrees, experience hunger. The intensity varies from person to person, and how much we desire it variesfood, I mean. And its the same with status. I think it follows along that normal distribution where the intensity of that desire is different from person to person. For someone like me, Im interested in studying it, and my guess is people who are interested in studying something like this probably have a higher-than-average desire for it. Others dont. I noticed this with my friends that I grew up around from back home. Of course, they experience their own versions of status games and so on, but its not nearly to the same extent as I see among more educated people. Although its more subtle, its pervasive.
Joseph Lee:So, it seems like this is something we can become aware of. What that awareness will do remains to be seen. Will that deconstruct the potency of it? Because as Jungians and psychoanalysts, thats one of the things we assumethat when something is unconscious, it exerts a disproportionate amount of influence, and we justify it or barely recognize it. But by becoming more aware of it, we can become more choiceful around it, perhaps. At least it becomes an object to consider rather than a subterranean engine thats pushing us right and left. So, in one way, being aware of anything gives us a little more breathing room around it.
So, it seems like this is something we can become aware of. What that awareness will do remains to be seen. Will that deconstruct the potency of it? Because as Jungians and psychoanalysts, thats one of the things we assumethat when something is unconscious, it exerts a disproportionate amount of influence, and we justify it or barely recognize it. But by becoming more aware of it, we can become more choiceful around it, perhaps. At least it becomes an object to consider rather than a subterranean engine thats pushing us right and left. So, in one way, being aware of anything gives us a little more breathing room around it.
Rob Henderson:Ive noticed this with people who become more aware of this desire for status, especially overachievers who are prone to burnout. They say yes to everything, they want to get every award, they want to get every piece of recognition they possibly can, and then once they recognize, "Oh, this stems from this desire that I was unaware of," they can still feel it, but theyre more able to ignore it. I think in terms of the feeling, I dont know how much control we have, but in terms of the actions we take, maybe we exert some control.
Ive noticed this with people who become more aware of this desire for status, especially overachievers who are prone to burnout. They say yes to everything, they want to get every award, they want to get every piece of recognition they possibly can, and then once they recognize, "Oh, this stems from this desire that I was unaware of," they can still feel it, but theyre more able to ignore it. I think in terms of the feeling, I dont know how much control we have, but in terms of the actions we take, maybe we exert some control.
Deborah Stewart:Exactly. I think that when we becomewhat I think Joseph is pointing tois when we become aware of something and its in consciousness, then we can choose. So, okay, I was really driven by this desire to get the Chamber of Commerce award or to buy a different kind of car. Once Im really aware of where that is in me, then I can say, "Oh, wait a minute." As Joseph said, it becomes an object; its out there, I can walk around it a little bit, look at it, and then say, "Well, I dont know, maybe I dont really need that." It can affect our choices. Altogether, one hopes it is basically freeing us into more awareness, just more wholeness. Whether that leads to a lot more money, like the person you were talking to in New York, or whether that leads to, "I think Ill go out and water the vegetables in the garden," we have choices. I can choose; Im not gripped by something like that underground engine Joseph was talking about that just runs things. At least, thats the hope.
Exactly. I think that when we becomewhat I think Joseph is pointing tois when we become aware of something and its in consciousness, then we can choose. So, okay, I was really driven by this desire to get the Chamber of Commerce award or to buy a different kind of car. Once Im really aware of where that is in me, then I can say, "Oh, wait a minute." As Joseph said, it becomes an object; its out there, I can walk around it a little bit, look at it, and then say, "Well, I dont know, maybe I dont really need that." It can affect our choices. Altogether, one hopes it is basically freeing us into more awareness, just more wholeness. Whether that leads to a lot more money, like the person you were talking to in New York, or whether that leads to, "I think Ill go out and water the vegetables in the garden," we have choices. I can choose; Im not gripped by something like that underground engine Joseph was talking about that just runs things. At least, thats the hope.
Joseph Lee:I think you raised something really interesting, and we obviously all have a lot to say about it. I wanted to link it to the idea of persona and shadow. Rob, I appreciate your framing about these different kinds of games. You mentioned the virtue game and the achievement game. Lets say were playing the achievement game. So, what weve identified with, what feels right to us, would be whats in the personahow we want others to perceive us. "Im very diligent, I work really hard, I win the awards, Im smart, Im competent, Im focused," whatever. But theres also always something thats going to be in the shadow that were going to disavow, thats going to be the opposite of that. That might be, "Well, Im grasping, Im petty, Im cutthroat," or whatever might be the shadow side. If you think about it, maybe the virtue stuff"I care about the environment, I care about diversity, I care about other people"but whats in the shadow is, "Its really important that people see me like this, and Im going to vie for being the most virtuous, even if that means I have to cut some other people down." I think itsI really appreciate the question you asked, Joseph: What can we do about this? I think if we translate it into Jungian terms, one of the things we can do is say, "All right, so virtue is important to me, or achievement is important to me, or power is important to me. Okay, thats okay. And whats going to be left in the shadow that I might then act out unconsciously or project onto other people?" I think were talking about the various ways that these insights might be applied in terms of our personal self-reflection.
I think you raised something really interesting, and we obviously all have a lot to say about it. I wanted to link it to the idea of persona and shadow. Rob, I appreciate your framing about these different kinds of games. You mentioned the virtue game and the achievement game. Lets say were playing the achievement game. So, what weve identified with, what feels right to us, would be whats in the personahow we want others to perceive us. "Im very diligent, I work really hard, I win the awards, Im smart, Im competent, Im focused," whatever. But theres also always something thats going to be in the shadow that were going to disavow, thats going to be the opposite of that. That might be, "Well, Im grasping, Im petty, Im cutthroat," or whatever might be the shadow side. If you think about it, maybe the virtue stuff"I care about the environment, I care about diversity, I care about other people"but whats in the shadow is, "Its really important that people see me like this, and Im going to vie for being the most virtuous, even if that means I have to cut some other people down." I think itsI really appreciate the question you asked, Joseph: What can we do about this? I think if we translate it into Jungian terms, one of the things we can do is say, "All right, so virtue is important to me, or achievement is important to me, or power is important to me. Okay, thats okay. And whats going to be left in the shadow that I might then act out unconsciously or project onto other people?" I think were talking about the various ways that these insights might be applied in terms of our personal self-reflection.
Rob Henderson:Yeah, I think so.
Yeah, I think so.
Joseph Lee:As Jungians, one of the things were also very interested in is that differentiation between the authentic self and then the values that we are colonized by. So, Im wondering, in your own process, because your book is autobiographical, and something inside of you prompted you to examine how you became the man that you have become. Often when we do that, its because we sense there is a secret in the narrative that we havent quite put together, we havent quite found. This is a personal question, Rob. Having done this investigative work, what parts of the most authentic Rob became clear for you as youve become aware of the impact of these various things?
As Jungians, one of the things were also very interested in is that differentiation between the authentic self and then the values that we are colonized by. So, Im wondering, in your own process, because your book is autobiographical, and something inside of you prompted you to examine how you became the man that you have become. Often when we do that, its because we sense there is a secret in the narrative that we havent quite put together, we havent quite found. This is a personal question, Rob. Having done this investigative work, what parts of the most authentic Rob became clear for you as youve become aware of the impact of these various things?
Rob Henderson:Two things became apparent to me. One was that I was always a curious kid. But I barely graduated high school with a 2.2 GPA. Part of me was afraid of acknowleding that I was a pretty bright kid, because if I admitted that about myself, then I would have had to raise my sights for my future. I just didnt feel worthy of it. There was a story I left out of the book. Shortly after I enlisted, I arrived at my first duty station, McChord Air Force Base. My supervisor noticed my test scores and my general enthusiasm. He suggested that we send an application to the Air Force Academy, and Id get fast-tracked into becoming an officer, a leadership role. This is extremely rare for a young enlisted kid to be offered something like this. I was 18 at this point. I just said, "No, thanks. Im good." I threw away this opportunity simply because I didnt feel worthy of it. I felt like, "Ive already gotten pretty far. The fact that I made it through all the training, Im doing well right nowmaybe this is about as good as I can hope for. Maybe Ive reached the ceiling as far as what Im capable of, of what I could reasonly hope for myself." On some level, maybe part of me thought I didnt even deserve what Id already accomplished. The other lesson was that through authoring the details of my life up till fairly recently, I could identify the specific moments when I exerted some agency and made my own decisions. There are some uncontrollable forces that govern our lives. But I could tell, "Oh, that was a moment when I made a decision, and it went well. That just reinforced for me that this remains true, not just for the stories that Im telling in the book, but also for my actual life right now, that I can exert some agency and change the course of my life.
Two things became apparent to me. One was that I was always a curious kid. But I barely graduated high school with a 2.2 GPA. Part of me was afraid of acknowleding that I was a pretty bright kid, because if I admitted that about myself, then I would have had to raise my sights for my future. I just didnt feel worthy of it. There was a story I left out of the book. Shortly after I enlisted, I arrived at my first duty station, McChord Air Force Base. My supervisor noticed my test scores and my general enthusiasm. He suggested that we send an application to the Air Force Academy, and Id get fast-tracked into becoming an officer, a leadership role. This is extremely rare for a young enlisted kid to be offered something like this. I was 18 at this point. I just said, "No, thanks. Im good." I threw away this opportunity simply because I didnt feel worthy of it. I felt like, "Ive already gotten pretty far. The fact that I made it through all the training, Im doing well right nowmaybe this is about as good as I can hope for. Maybe Ive reached the ceiling as far as what Im capable of, of what I could reasonly hope for myself." On some level, maybe part of me thought I didnt even deserve what Id already accomplished. The other lesson was that through authoring the details of my life up till fairly recently, I could identify the specific moments when I exerted some agency and made my own decisions. There are some uncontrollable forces that govern our lives. But I could tell, "Oh, that was a moment when I made a decision, and it went well. That just reinforced for me that this remains true, not just for the stories that Im telling in the book, but also for my actual life right now, that I can exert some agency and change the course of my life.
Deborah Stewart:You also mentioned, and its in the book, about the relationship to class and ease. Are we at ease saying, "Oh yeah, great, I could go to the Air Force Academy and become an officer"? How many different worlds are we comfortable in, in lots of respects, but especially that world of class? Could I really go to a university like Yale? We could literalize it: Am I comfortable living abroad for a year? Am I comfortable trying something new that seems beyond my reach, out of my comfort zone? It comes up in a lot of ways, including the interior realm"To what extent can I feel my feelings and examine myself, read these books, and have these encounters and push my own boundariesinner boundaries and outer world boundariesversus saying, 'Hey, Im good.'"
You also mentioned, and its in the book, about the relationship to class and ease. Are we at ease saying, "Oh yeah, great, I could go to the Air Force Academy and become an officer"? How many different worlds are we comfortable in, in lots of respects, but especially that world of class? Could I really go to a university like Yale? We could literalize it: Am I comfortable living abroad for a year? Am I comfortable trying something new that seems beyond my reach, out of my comfort zone? It comes up in a lot of ways, including the interior realm"To what extent can I feel my feelings and examine myself, read these books, and have these encounters and push my own boundariesinner boundaries and outer world boundariesversus saying, 'Hey, Im good.'"
Lisa Marchiano:Deb, what the sociological literature sayswhich Im not super familiar with, so Im sort of making this upis that issue of ease that you just pinpointed, thats pretty much what upper-middle-class parents try to confer to their children, even kind of unconsciously. "Were going to give you broadening experiences. Youre going to spend the summer on a college campus, or youre going to spend some time abroad." Thats what theyre doing, right? Theyre conferring ease. Rob, somewhere in the book you mentioned, and I think you were quoting Paul Fussell, about what puts you into the upper class, I suppose, is having at least one parent who went to college. Do I have that right? Am I recalling that correctly? I have some analysands who were raised poor, and its a thingits a whole thingbecause theres so much shame and that lack of ease and never feeling worthy. I saw one of these people in the past week or so, and I said, "Can you just remind me, did one of your parents go to college?" She said, "No." I said, "Yep." We were talking about how hard-won her ease has been, which brings me back to a question that I have for you. You said, "No, thanks," to the Air Force Academy. How, a few years later, did you think, "Yeah, Yale"? What changed in you to allow you to inhabit that possibility?
Deb, what the sociological literature sayswhich Im not super familiar with, so Im sort of making this upis that issue of ease that you just pinpointed, thats pretty much what upper-middle-class parents try to confer to their children, even kind of unconsciously. "Were going to give you broadening experiences. Youre going to spend the summer on a college campus, or youre going to spend some time abroad." Thats what theyre doing, right? Theyre conferring ease. Rob, somewhere in the book you mentioned, and I think you were quoting Paul Fussell, about what puts you into the upper class, I suppose, is having at least one parent who went to college. Do I have that right? Am I recalling that correctly? I have some analysands who were raised poor, and its a thingits a whole thingbecause theres so much shame and that lack of ease and never feeling worthy. I saw one of these people in the past week or so, and I said, "Can you just remind me, did one of your parents go to college?" She said, "No." I said, "Yep." We were talking about how hard-won her ease has been, which brings me back to a question that I have for you. You said, "No, thanks," to the Air Force Academy. How, a few years later, did you think, "Yeah, Yale"? What changed in you to allow you to inhabit that possibility?
Rob Henderson:By that point, I was 24 years old. Id done quite a bit of self-work. I describe in the book how I was in rehab, received some therapy, and had read a lot of books. By that point, Id been in the Air Force for six or seven years, had a lot of leadership experiences, and traveled a lot. Without fail, all of my performance reports were exceedingly good. I think all of those experiences collectively informed me that Im a pretty competent person. If I were going to start from square one and go back to college and be 25 years old with a bunch of 18-year-olds, I at least wanted to shoot as high as I could. So, I went to Yale.
By that point, I was 24 years old. Id done quite a bit of self-work. I describe in the book how I was in rehab, received some therapy, and had read a lot of books. By that point, Id been in the Air Force for six or seven years, had a lot of leadership experiences, and traveled a lot. Without fail, all of my performance reports were exceedingly good. I think all of those experiences collectively informed me that Im a pretty competent person. If I were going to start from square one and go back to college and be 25 years old with a bunch of 18-year-olds, I at least wanted to shoot as high as I could. So, I went to Yale.
I didnt feel the ease when I got there, which I describe in the bookthe kind of fish-out-of-water experience of being around a bunch of students who had gone to expensive private boarding schools and had essentially trained their whole lives to go to a place like Yale. They knew how to handle the reading load and the subtleties of what it meant to do well in a course versus not. When I was in high school, a B was a good gradeoh, you get an A, great, and a B is good, and a C is average. Thats the kind of template. Then at Yale, an A is good, and an A-minus is bad. A B-plus is like, "You didnt really go to class, and you kind of put in a half-hearted effort." I didnt know this. No one fails at these elite universities. The reason they have such high graduation rates is you have to try to fail. Everyone graduates, but then there are these subtleties of, "A 3.7 GPA means this, and a 3.9 means that." On paper, everything looks great, but of course, these metrics get corrupted, and students start to stress out over the difference between an A and an A-minus.
How to handle the reading load, the assignments, all of itthe students just knew how to do it. Not only had they personally trained through their own educational experiences, but they had friends. "Oh, my older brother went to Yale, and he gave me the notes for this class already. I have a Google Doc with everything I need to know for this class because my friend graduated from here last year." Whatever it was, I had no connections to the university like that. So, all of those things made it difficult on the academic front and then on the social front toolearning how to get along with these students who were not only much younger than me but had completely different life experiences. By the time I was 18 years old, I had worked a series of jobs and enlisted in the military, and a lot of these kids had never worked a job, never paid taxesanything like that.
I noted in the book how our standard for what counts as an adult versus a kid varies based on class. A 20-year-old who never goes to college and maybe goes straight into the workforce or joins the militarythats an adult. But if youre a 20-year-old on a college campus, youre still a kid. We saw a bit of this recently with some of the demonstrations on college campuses, and people were saying, "Oh, these Harvard Law students are just a bunch of kids." Im thinking, "If youre 27 years old at Harvard Law, you get to be a kid until youre 27?" When do you get to become an adult then? College just seemed to prolong adolescence, and then grad school, and so on. Although I was 25, I was still relatively young, but I felt old. What I sometimes say is I actually kind of aged in reverse because each additional semester and each year that I was on campus, I sort of shed that old military attitude and gradually assimilated into the academic environment and became a student. It was actually nice to have that experience.
Joseph Lee:Rob, when I was listening to your book, it was nice that you narrated it yourself because I felt like you were talking to me as I was listening to the audiobook. One of the things that I heard in your book is the transition between things not mattering and things mattering. People who have been raised in traumatogenic homes, people who have been raised with few choices and a tremendous amount of sufferingone of the ways they defend against despair is to say, "It doesnt matter. This doesnt matter, that doesnt matter." Its a way of kind of dismissing or coding things in a kind of mist so that were not plagued by them. This is a very common defense that children discover as a coping mechanism. For some people, that can still haunt them well into adulthood, or they can collapse back into it in the face of adversity, which of course makes them very vulnerable. But one of the things that happened in your life is that things began to matter. Im wondering if you can speak to that transitionfrom things not mattering to things really mattering.
Rob, when I was listening to your book, it was nice that you narrated it yourself because I felt like you were talking to me as I was listening to the audiobook. One of the things that I heard in your book is the transition between things not mattering and things mattering. People who have been raised in traumatogenic homes, people who have been raised with few choices and a tremendous amount of sufferingone of the ways they defend against despair is to say, "It doesnt matter. This doesnt matter, that doesnt matter." Its a way of kind of dismissing or coding things in a kind of mist so that were not plagued by them. This is a very common defense that children discover as a coping mechanism. For some people, that can still haunt them well into adulthood, or they can collapse back into it in the face of adversity, which of course makes them very vulnerable. But one of the things that happened in your life is that things began to matter. Im wondering if you can speak to that transitionfrom things not mattering to things really mattering.
Rob Henderson:Early on in my life, everything was so fleeting and unstable, this feeling of "Okay, so Im moving to another foster home now." I just learned to shut off my feelings. Those early chapters of the book were difficult to writenot necessarily because of the experiences themselves, but because of the lack of agency, that feeling of powerlessness and vulnerability. I didnt expect that to be so difficult to write about. Just having every aspect of my life taken like thatof "Oh, youre living here now," or I would befriend one of my foster siblings, and then they would be taken, and I would have no say or no input at allwas devastating as a little kid.
Early on in my life, everything was so fleeting and unstable, this feeling of "Okay, so Im moving to another foster home now." I just learned to shut off my feelings. Those early chapters of the book were difficult to writenot necessarily because of the experiences themselves, but because of the lack of agency, that feeling of powerlessness and vulnerability. I didnt expect that to be so difficult to write about. Just having every aspect of my life taken like thatof "Oh, youre living here now," or I would befriend one of my foster siblings, and then they would be taken, and I would have no say or no input at allwas devastating as a little kid.
Each time something positive happened in my life, it always seemed like right around the corner, catastrophe lurked. Eventually, toward the end ofTroubledI was 28 years old by the time I internalized this. I spent especially my teenage years and early adulthood trying to become self-reliant, self-sufficient. You dont want to depend on anyone; you dont want to rely on anyone. I realized ultimately it was unfulfilling to be, on some level, selfish. It was all about me and putting my own needs first. I began to think about my adoptive family, about my mother and my sister, and then my own future family. Now that Ive become self-sufficient, how do I become that reliable person? So Ive been working on it. Im not all the way there yet, but Ive been trying to become a better brother, better son, someone others can rely on. My life is pretty good now, so how do I help those around me.
Each time something positive happened in my life, it always seemed like right around the corner, catastrophe lurked. Eventually, toward the end of
I was 28 years old by the time I internalized this. I spent especially my teenage years and early adulthood trying to become self-reliant, self-sufficient. You dont want to depend on anyone; you dont want to rely on anyone. I realized ultimately it was unfulfilling to be, on some level, selfish. It was all about me and putting my own needs first. I began to think about my adoptive family, about my mother and my sister, and then my own future family. Now that Ive become self-sufficient, how do I become that reliable person? So Ive been working on it. Im not all the way there yet, but Ive been trying to become a better brother, better son, someone others can rely on. My life is pretty good now, so how do I help those around me.
Lisa Marchiano:Thats a great question, Joseph. Rob, I just want to say, Im looking at my highlights. I highlighted the sentence, "The military asked that I put myself in the service of something higher than myself."
Thats a great question, Joseph. Rob, I just want to say, Im looking at my highlights. I highlighted the sentence, "The military asked that I put myself in the service of something higher than myself."
Rob Henderson:Demanding something of people can actually be beneficial. When you're a small child, small tasksI tell this story about how my adoptive mother was in a relationship with a woman named Shelly, and they had these chores for me. I would argue about them, but it was actually good for me. At the time, I didnt realize that; I was just a kid. But in hindsight, the feeling that I was contributing to the house, to my familythose moments, those are the memories that I have. Those are the things that I remember, and they played an outsized role in my youth.
Demanding something of people can actually be beneficial. When you're a small child, small tasksI tell this story about how my adoptive mother was in a relationship with a woman named Shelly, and they had these chores for me. I would argue about them, but it was actually good for me. At the time, I didnt realize that; I was just a kid. But in hindsight, the feeling that I was contributing to the house, to my familythose moments, those are the memories that I have. Those are the things that I remember, and they played an outsized role in my youth.
Joseph Lee:I'm thinking about how your outer world journey so parallels the inner world journey of what happens to a kid whos powerless and isnt even seen. The journey you took, from a Jungian perspective, we would call ego development: "I've been tasked with certain chores at home, and I have to do them. People keep telling me that I can do this or I should strive for that." We get to that place of competence in the world and self-reliance. We want, in the first half of life, for everybody to develop ego strengthsomething thats flexible and competent, and so on. Then theres that other place in midlife of, "What am I really doing? Ive accomplished the tasks of the first half of life, now I can reflect, I can think about relationships, I can consider other aspects of myself." Rob, how did you learn how to regulate your intense feelings? There are stories of you being a young kid and having quite a temper, just punching somebody in the eye who provoked you. Here today in our conversation, youre a very thoughtful person. That had to be earned, I imagine.
I'm thinking about how your outer world journey so parallels the inner world journey of what happens to a kid whos powerless and isnt even seen. The journey you took, from a Jungian perspective, we would call ego development: "I've been tasked with certain chores at home, and I have to do them. People keep telling me that I can do this or I should strive for that." We get to that place of competence in the world and self-reliance. We want, in the first half of life, for everybody to develop ego strengthsomething thats flexible and competent, and so on. Then theres that other place in midlife of, "What am I really doing? Ive accomplished the tasks of the first half of life, now I can reflect, I can think about relationships, I can consider other aspects of myself." Rob, how did you learn how to regulate your intense feelings? There are stories of you being a young kid and having quite a temper, just punching somebody in the eye who provoked you. Here today in our conversation, youre a very thoughtful person. That had to be earned, I imagine.
Rob Henderson:Part of it is just getting older. Very few people are as confrontational in their 30s as they are in their teens. That was just how I was. I think this may in itself be a characteristic of classthe willingness of young males to be hostile and ready to physically fight at a moment's notice. With time, with maturity, and all the experiences I had later in the military, I just learned to feel the feelings but choose a different way. I still have that. Sometimes its just luck. The other day, I was walking outside and I locked eyes with this guy on his bicycle. Its funnyI have a very similar scene in my book. This guy on a bridge riding a bicycle, and then he attempts to...so almost similar circumstances, weirdly enough. But Im recovering from an injury right now, and he stops and says, "Why are you looking at me?" He gets right in my face and says, "Why are you looking at me?" I dont know if youre allowed to swear on this podcast, but I said, "Get the fuck out of my face." But inside, Im like, "Man, Im injured; that was not the right thing to say." But then, fortunately, another guy walks by, sees that were in this kind of verbal altercation, and he says, "Hey, whats going on here? Just get out of here. What are you doing?" I live in a pretty nice neighborhood, but this guy on the bicycle probably doesnt live here. So, occasionally things happen. But I think if that had happened when I was 17, the police would have been involved, and it would have turned into something else. Generally, I think it is just getting older and attempting to exert some self-control.
Part of it is just getting older. Very few people are as confrontational in their 30s as they are in their teens. That was just how I was. I think this may in itself be a characteristic of classthe willingness of young males to be hostile and ready to physically fight at a moment's notice. With time, with maturity, and all the experiences I had later in the military, I just learned to feel the feelings but choose a different way. I still have that. Sometimes its just luck. The other day, I was walking outside and I locked eyes with this guy on his bicycle. Its funnyI have a very similar scene in my book. This guy on a bridge riding a bicycle, and then he attempts to...so almost similar circumstances, weirdly enough. But Im recovering from an injury right now, and he stops and says, "Why are you looking at me?" He gets right in my face and says, "Why are you looking at me?" I dont know if youre allowed to swear on this podcast, but I said, "Get the fuck out of my face." But inside, Im like, "Man, Im injured; that was not the right thing to say." But then, fortunately, another guy walks by, sees that were in this kind of verbal altercation, and he says, "Hey, whats going on here? Just get out of here. What are you doing?" I live in a pretty nice neighborhood, but this guy on the bicycle probably doesnt live here. So, occasionally things happen. But I think if that had happened when I was 17, the police would have been involved, and it would have turned into something else. Generally, I think it is just getting older and attempting to exert some self-control.
The other thing is, its not so much about the individual but the environment. What I mean by that is, if youre in a place full of people like how I was when I was a teenager, even if you arent necessarily an aggressive person, you will find yourself in altercations with people who are seeking it out, like this guy probably was on his bike. But if youre in a nice neighborhood where people have money and people have lived relatively safe and comfortable lives, you just dont ever find yourself in a position where confrontation like that could happen in the first place. Even if you are a confrontational type, it just never occurs in your world. Ive noticed that toothat ever since I went off to college, everyones so nice. Theyre polite. Of course, theres verbal backbiting and rumors and gossip. There are other ways that aggression is expressed, but physically, no one ever wants to fight. Its nice.
Deborah Stewart:Im sure it is. Its a relief.
Im sure it is. Its a relief.
Lisa Marchiano:One other place that Id like to go, if we can, is going back a little bit to how we understand class from a Jungian perspective or what a Jungian perspective can bring to this discussion. It seems to me that perhaps an interest in alchemy or astrology or myth is a little arcane and inaccessible to some. Jung is difficult to read too. But the need for meaning transcends classthat truly is universal. Jung, of course, does try to address what is universal in the human spirit. So, I like to think that Jungian psychology does have some medicine for us all and perhaps can serve to unite us, broaden our perspective, and help us to feel more into the plight of others who have had very different experiences from us. What to do about the larger structural issues that make Jungian analysis difficult to accessI dont know that I have any startling insights about that, but I did just want to touch on that briefly. I wonder...I mean, I think its been in our discussion somewhat, Rob, because you talked about recognizing that you could be a better person, you could be in service to something larger. I think thats often where meaning springs from. You said, "Im going to be a better son or a better brother." Thats just really in our DNA as humans, I thinkthe need to feel connected, yoked to a larger purpose. Maybe Ill stop meandering there and see if anyone wants to add something.
One other place that Id like to go, if we can, is going back a little bit to how we understand class from a Jungian perspective or what a Jungian perspective can bring to this discussion. It seems to me that perhaps an interest in alchemy or astrology or myth is a little arcane and inaccessible to some. Jung is difficult to read too. But the need for meaning transcends classthat truly is universal. Jung, of course, does try to address what is universal in the human spirit. So, I like to think that Jungian psychology does have some medicine for us all and perhaps can serve to unite us, broaden our perspective, and help us to feel more into the plight of others who have had very different experiences from us. What to do about the larger structural issues that make Jungian analysis difficult to accessI dont know that I have any startling insights about that, but I did just want to touch on that briefly. I wonder...I mean, I think its been in our discussion somewhat, Rob, because you talked about recognizing that you could be a better person, you could be in service to something larger. I think thats often where meaning springs from. You said, "Im going to be a better son or a better brother." Thats just really in our DNA as humans, I thinkthe need to feel connected, yoked to a larger purpose. Maybe Ill stop meandering there and see if anyone wants to add something.
Lisa Marchiano:Im going to take us in a totally different direction because Im thinking, Rob, of something you said earlier, and I cant remember if we were recording or not. You said most of the people who grow up in your situation are not going to turn out like you do. You talked a little bit in the book about who the book is for, whats the message, and in some sense, youve said, "I dont want the message to be, You should have hope, because just statistically, most people who grow up in that environment are not going to go to Yale or get a PhD." I really heard the cry in your book that there are policies and norms that can soften or mitigate the effects of poverty. In some sense, weve abandoned some of those over the past 50 years or so. I want to give you a chance to talk a little bit about luxury beliefs because I know thats kind of a special area of yours.
Im going to take us in a totally different direction because Im thinking, Rob, of something you said earlier, and I cant remember if we were recording or not. You said most of the people who grow up in your situation are not going to turn out like you do. You talked a little bit in the book about who the book is for, whats the message, and in some sense, youve said, "I dont want the message to be, You should have hope, because just statistically, most people who grow up in that environment are not going to go to Yale or get a PhD." I really heard the cry in your book that there are policies and norms that can soften or mitigate the effects of poverty. In some sense, weve abandoned some of those over the past 50 years or so. I want to give you a chance to talk a little bit about luxury beliefs because I know thats kind of a special area of yours.
Rob Henderson:Yeah, well, despite my efforts, I do still receive emails from people who have had similar lives to me, some even worse, who actually did find my book to be a source of hope for them. I think thats actually okay. I guess my fear was that more materially prosperous, educated people would come away with it thinking, "Well, this guy did it, so why doesnt everyone else just get their act together and work really hard and turn their life around like he did?" But of course, if people like me, who grew up the way I did, read it and start to rethink some of their everyday decisions and habits and practices and find my book to be a source of meaning and hope, thats great.
Yeah, well, despite my efforts, I do still receive emails from people who have had similar lives to me, some even worse, who actually did find my book to be a source of hope for them. I think thats actually okay. I guess my fear was that more materially prosperous, educated people would come away with it thinking, "Well, this guy did it, so why doesnt everyone else just get their act together and work really hard and turn their life around like he did?" But of course, if people like me, who grew up the way I did, read it and start to rethink some of their everyday decisions and habits and practices and find my book to be a source of meaning and hope, thats great.
So, the luxury beliefs ideait started to take shape in my mind shortly after I arrived on campus in 2015. I arrived at Yale at a very unusual time in terms of the ongoing debatesvery contentious debatesaround the nature of higher education, what the purpose of a university education is, and what these communities are meant to do, what their aims are. At Yale in 2015, maybe some of your listeners would be familiar with what became known as the Halloween costume controversy at Yale. Very long story short, I got out of the military in August, started class in September, and then in October, shortly before Halloween, the Yale administration released an email saying, "Be wary of what you wear for your costume this Halloween," kind of issuing this warning against cultural appropriation"Be sensitive," and so on. Then one of the professors at Yaleshe was what were then called "masters" and "associate masters"she was an associate master of a residential college on campus, and she sent an email to her students essentially challenging this idea, telling these students, "Hey, youre all adults. If you want to wear what you want to wear for Halloween, thats fine. If you have an issue with it, just speak amongst yourselves. We dont need Yale bureaucratic guidelines telling us what we should and shouldnt wear." In response to this very innocuous emailand it was innocuous, I read that email four or five times, attempting to discern just what was so offensive about it, and to this day, I still cantI can kind of understand because Ive been so immersed in these environments that I can almost see it, but even then, its hard. At that point, I had no idea. In response to that email, there was this eruption on campus, and hundreds of students were marching around campus calling for her to be fired. Her husband, who defended herthey wanted him to be fired as well. He was also a professor on campus. That was six or eight weeks into my first semester, and that was a very shocking introduction to higher ed.
When I would ask students to explain just what the offense was here, they would get upset with me for asking that question. One studentI tell this story in the bookI asked this question, and she responded by saying I was too privileged to understand the depth of the pain these professors had caused. I knew that she had attended an expensive private boarding school and was a very conventional Yale student, but she was trained to think about privilege in a very narrow way, and so that was her response to my question. Then I would have other kinds of conversations with students and ask them different kinds of questions, and I realized they had completely different life experiences from me. Im not just talking about undergrads, by the way. I worked in a psychology lab where there were plenty of grad students who were running the day-to-day operations of conducting studies and so on. These were PhD students and postdocs. I would speak with professors and administrators, and kind of all across the university, I would hear views around family. The standard line on campus was that all families are equal and that ideally, we could get beyond this idea of married parenting and find new ways to experiment with family formation. Yet, when I would ask these students how they were raised, they would tell me they were raised by two married parents. Then when I would ask them, "How do you plan to have your family if you plan on having one?" they would tell me, "Oh, I was raised by two married parents, and Ill probably do the same for my kids. But just because I want to do it that way doesnt mean thats how people should do it."
From my perspective, growing up the way that I had and seeing the kind of family fragmentation I had seen, I was essentially hearing these people say, "I benefited from this very stable family structure, and I plan to carry it forward for my own kids, but officially, my stance is people shouldnt do this." Then I learned that the vast majority of the students on campus had come from very stable family backgrounds. It wasnt just a matter of money. I knew going in that a lot of these students would come from very affluent backgrounds, but when I realized that essentially every single one of them had been raised by two married parents, and I compared that with my friends that I grew up with in high schoolhow I had five close friends growing up, and of the six of us, none of us were raised by two married parentsthat couldnt be a coincidence. I had friends who ended up in prison or shot, and they had one kind of family, and then these other students, who had a different kind of family, ended up at a place like Yale. It was just hard for me to reconcile this without adopting the view that many of these Yale students hadthat this thing is just completely unimportant and has no kind of predictive power in terms of your life course and outcomes.
Same things like drug decriminalization. The line was that drugs should be completely decriminalized. I found that hard to accept as well because of my own experience with substance abuse and a lot of the people that I grew up around. I cite statistics in the book too that some readers have been surprised by. Perhaps counterintuitively, the more education someone has, the more likely they are to support drug decriminalization. The same with all these other thingsfamily formation. Another example is selling addictive technology to people while exerting very careful norms at home about screen use. There seemed to be this duplicity on campus. So eventually, I coined this term "luxury beliefs"ideas and opinions that confer status on the upper class while inflicting costs on the lower classes. This can take the form of policy. I write at some length in the book about "defund the police" and the consequences of that movement. Its funnylike the "defund the police" movement, there was an increase in violent crime. From 2020 to about 2022, you would occasionally see some news coverage of this. Youd open the pages ofThe Wall Street Journal, and you would see, "Year-over-year crime, violent crime, has increased X% since 2020," something along those lines. But then within the last maybe year or so, there have been very high-profile cases ofthere was a journalist who was killed in Philadelphia, another journalist that was killed in New York City, a tech entrepreneur who was stabbed in San Francisco. Now people are starting to recognize that this attitude toward law enforcement has unraveled, and its starting to reach people who ordinarily wouldnt be murdered. These people, like journalists and tech entrepreneurs, received entire articles written about them. To me, this was an interesting double standard where if you are a poor person who gets killed, you get folded into these statistics, but if you are a member of the modern aristocracy, you get an entire article written about you and how you were killed, what your career was, and the kinds of things that you were interested in. You are treated in a very different way.
Same things like drug decriminalization. The line was that drugs should be completely decriminalized. I found that hard to accept as well because of my own experience with substance abuse and a lot of the people that I grew up around. I cite statistics in the book too that some readers have been surprised by. Perhaps counterintuitively, the more education someone has, the more likely they are to support drug decriminalization. The same with all these other thingsfamily formation. Another example is selling addictive technology to people while exerting very careful norms at home about screen use. There seemed to be this duplicity on campus. So eventually, I coined this term "luxury beliefs"ideas and opinions that confer status on the upper class while inflicting costs on the lower classes. This can take the form of policy. I write at some length in the book about "defund the police" and the consequences of that movement. Its funnylike the "defund the police" movement, there was an increase in violent crime. From 2020 to about 2022, you would occasionally see some news coverage of this. Youd open the pages of
, and you would see, "Year-over-year crime, violent crime, has increased X% since 2020," something along those lines. But then within the last maybe year or so, there have been very high-profile cases ofthere was a journalist who was killed in Philadelphia, another journalist that was killed in New York City, a tech entrepreneur who was stabbed in San Francisco. Now people are starting to recognize that this attitude toward law enforcement has unraveled, and its starting to reach people who ordinarily wouldnt be murdered. These people, like journalists and tech entrepreneurs, received entire articles written about them. To me, this was an interesting double standard where if you are a poor person who gets killed, you get folded into these statistics, but if you are a member of the modern aristocracy, you get an entire article written about you and how you were killed, what your career was, and the kinds of things that you were interested in. You are treated in a very different way.
I flesh out the idea, drawing onyeah, we talked about Paul Fussell. I draw on Thorstein Veblen, who wrote this classic text in sociology,The Theory of the Leisure Class. Pierre Bourdieu, who wrote this bookDistinction: A Social Critique of the Judgement of Tastehe writes about cultural capital. He writes about how people perform their social class. They convert their material resources into arcane and intricate knowledgeabout wine, about art, about maybe alchemy.
I flesh out the idea, drawing onyeah, we talked about Paul Fussell. I draw on Thorstein Veblen, who wrote this classic text in sociology,
. Pierre Bourdieu, who wrote this book
he writes about cultural capital. He writes about how people perform their social class. They convert their material resources into arcane and intricate knowledgeabout wine, about art, about maybe alchemy.
Deborah Stewart:Exactly.
Exactly.
Rob Henderson:And essentially, theyre subcommunicating, you know, when they tell you about the exotic locales theyve traveled to or how this vintage is different from that. Theyre kind of subcommunicating, "Im in this community, in this environment. I went to these kinds of schools," and so on. My claim is that luxury beliefs are one expression of that. If you adopt the view of, "If the conventional view is, its good to have police, probably a good idea to get married before you have kids, there should be some laws around drug use"if thats conventional opinion, a good way to stand out from the masses is to adopt the opposite view on those things. It signals sophistication. It signals that you probably went to a pretty expensive college, and you read certain periodicals, and so on and so forth. Some of this arose out of my own personal experiences. Sometimes Ill go home and talk to my mom and say, "Have you heard of this acronym or that new movement or this, that, and the other?" and shes like, "What are you talking about? What are they teaching you at these places?" My mom isshes a working-class Democrat. Shes voted Democrat her whole life, so this isnt a political issue. I think it really is about class more so than about politics.
And essentially, theyre subcommunicating, you know, when they tell you about the exotic locales theyve traveled to or how this vintage is different from that. Theyre kind of subcommunicating, "Im in this community, in this environment. I went to these kinds of schools," and so on. My claim is that luxury beliefs are one expression of that. If you adopt the view of, "If the conventional view is, its good to have police, probably a good idea to get married before you have kids, there should be some laws around drug use"if thats conventional opinion, a good way to stand out from the masses is to adopt the opposite view on those things. It signals sophistication. It signals that you probably went to a pretty expensive college, and you read certain periodicals, and so on and so forth. Some of this arose out of my own personal experiences. Sometimes Ill go home and talk to my mom and say, "Have you heard of this acronym or that new movement or this, that, and the other?" and shes like, "What are you talking about? What are they teaching you at these places?" My mom isshes a working-class Democrat. Shes voted Democrat her whole life, so this isnt a political issue. I think it really is about class more so than about politics.
Lisa Marchiano:Maybe also its about the danger of conflating the ability to conceptualize, of the, "Wait a minute, should we rise above our usual concepts around law enforcement, for example, and lets just think about something different and how it could be better or less regulated and concretized?" And we conflate that with empirical realities around the need for regulation, or the empirical realities about married couples who then have children and continue to have stable householdsthat tends to do better for kids opportunities and successes in life. Theres just a difference between what we can think of and conceptualize and what actually tends to work for most people, most of the time, in the so-called real world.
Maybe also its about the danger of conflating the ability to conceptualize, of the, "Wait a minute, should we rise above our usual concepts around law enforcement, for example, and lets just think about something different and how it could be better or less regulated and concretized?" And we conflate that with empirical realities around the need for regulation, or the empirical realities about married couples who then have children and continue to have stable householdsthat tends to do better for kids opportunities and successes in life. Theres just a difference between what we can think of and conceptualize and what actually tends to work for most people, most of the time, in the so-called real world.
Rob Henderson:Yeah, and I hopeI havent received these accusations, but I do hope when people read the book that Im not trying to be this finger-wagging moralist or something, you know? I grew up around divorced families and single parents and people who used drugs, and I used drugs. People are flawed and complicated, and we all fall short of our own ideals. But I do think that its probably better if the most influential and prominent members of society at least attempt to pay lip service to a good example, even with the knowledge that, look, were all flawed, and were all going to make mistakes. But still, there are certain ideals we should at least aim to strive for. Ive sometimes suggested that I liked thetheres always going to be some degree of hypocrisy in society, or part of whatever you want to call them, elites or the upper class.
Yeah, and I hopeI havent received these accusations, but I do hope when people read the book that Im not trying to be this finger-wagging moralist or something, you know? I grew up around divorced families and single parents and people who used drugs, and I used drugs. People are flawed and complicated, and we all fall short of our own ideals. But I do think that its probably better if the most influential and prominent members of society at least attempt to pay lip service to a good example, even with the knowledge that, look, were all flawed, and were all going to make mistakes. But still, there are certain ideals we should at least aim to strive for. Ive sometimes suggested that I liked thetheres always going to be some degree of hypocrisy in society, or part of whatever you want to call them, elites or the upper class.
Rob Henderson:I like what I call the John F. Kennedy model of hypocrisy more so than the kind we have now. JFK, he was a flawed man, but the image he presented to the American public was that he was a good husband, a good father, he tried to do the right thing, and so on and so forth. He was a war hero; they had this whole sort of mythology around him. But in his private life, we know that he was a philanderer and often an absentee father and all these shortcomings. But he paid lip servicehe thought it was important to set an example for the public. And now, I think we almost have the opposite. Now, theres a Yale law professorhe wrote this great book,The Meritocracy Trap, a couple of years ago, Daniel Markovitsand he says that now our modern elites are "non-practicing libertines." What he means by that is most educated people today live very sort of bourgeois, conventional lives. They get married, they have kids, and for the most part, they live a very stable, conventional life. But if you ask them their opinions and attitudes around family, around marriage, around behavioral transgressions, and so on, they take a very relaxed attitude. So, they support libertinism, but theyre non-practicingthey dont partake in it. So, the hypocrisy has almost flipped, where it used to be you paid lip service to conventional values but privately philandering. Now, you publicly support philandering but privately behave in a more conventional way.
I like what I call the John F. Kennedy model of hypocrisy more so than the kind we have now. JFK, he was a flawed man, but the image he presented to the American public was that he was a good husband, a good father, he tried to do the right thing, and so on and so forth. He was a war hero; they had this whole sort of mythology around him. But in his private life, we know that he was a philanderer and often an absentee father and all these shortcomings. But he paid lip servicehe thought it was important to set an example for the public. And now, I think we almost have the opposite. Now, theres a Yale law professorhe wrote this great book,
, a couple of years ago, Daniel Markovitsand he says that now our modern elites are "non-practicing libertines." What he means by that is most educated people today live very sort of bourgeois, conventional lives. They get married, they have kids, and for the most part, they live a very stable, conventional life. But if you ask them their opinions and attitudes around family, around marriage, around behavioral transgressions, and so on, they take a very relaxed attitude. So, they support libertinism, but theyre non-practicingthey dont partake in it. So, the hypocrisy has almost flipped, where it used to be you paid lip service to conventional values but privately philandering. Now, you publicly support philandering but privately behave in a more conventional way.
Lisa Marchiano:And so, your thesis, which you go into a little bit more in the book, is that by the elites kind of espousing, for example, that family formation doesnt matter, that actually has a trickle-down effect throughout the rest of society. So, the elites, who are off getting married and raising kids in two-parent families, are kind of passing on this really significant privilege of having two married parents while promoting something that we know is harmful, even if it seems fashionable somehow.
And so, your thesis, which you go into a little bit more in the book, is that by the elites kind of espousing, for example, that family formation doesnt matter, that actually has a trickle-down effect throughout the rest of society. So, the elites, who are off getting married and raising kids in two-parent families, are kind of passing on this really significant privilege of having two married parents while promoting something that we know is harmful, even if it seems fashionable somehow.
Rob Henderson:Yeah, yeah. I think thats basically it. The people who set the example, who set the discourse and the conversation, whats interesting, whats trendywho set the standards around culture and policyI dont think its malicious. I think, for the most part, its just a kind of navet and a willingness to go along, to conform, to jump on the bandwagon. A lot of people in academia, who I thought were perfectly sensible people, there was this period of suspension of reflection in 2020, where they were supporting the defund the police movement. I was just floored by that because I thought, well, if you live in a safe neighborhood, a low-crime area, or a gated community, then you may not need police, but most people do. So, yeah, this was one example of not really thinking through the policies that you happen to be supporting. Even if they, on the surface, seem sympathetic or compassionate, consider what are the second-order consequences.
Yeah, yeah. I think thats basically it. The people who set the example, who set the discourse and the conversation, whats interesting, whats trendywho set the standards around culture and policyI dont think its malicious. I think, for the most part, its just a kind of navet and a willingness to go along, to conform, to jump on the bandwagon. A lot of people in academia, who I thought were perfectly sensible people, there was this period of suspension of reflection in 2020, where they were supporting the defund the police movement. I was just floored by that because I thought, well, if you live in a safe neighborhood, a low-crime area, or a gated community, then you may not need police, but most people do. So, yeah, this was one example of not really thinking through the policies that you happen to be supporting. Even if they, on the surface, seem sympathetic or compassionate, consider what are the second-order consequences.
Joseph Lee:Well, I think its also the collapse of complexity. There are problems in terms of law enforcement and how they do or do not serve various demographics, but the simplistic idea, "Well, then we should just eliminate it," is part of that mob psychology. When large groups regress, their capacity to think in complex ways also collapses, and then theyre comforted by slogans. "Defund the police" is a three-word solution to an enormous, complicated situation that varies state by state, city by city, community by community. Somehow, it seems reassuring"Build the wall," "Defund the police"these three-word slogans, which, oh my goodness, make it seem like thats all it will take. But again, when large groups are put under enough stress one way or another, theyll align with often ridiculously simplistic, almost childish solutions and actually try to implement them, and thats dangerous, of course.
Well, I think its also the collapse of complexity. There are problems in terms of law enforcement and how they do or do not serve various demographics, but the simplistic idea, "Well, then we should just eliminate it," is part of that mob psychology. When large groups regress, their capacity to think in complex ways also collapses, and then theyre comforted by slogans. "Defund the police" is a three-word solution to an enormous, complicated situation that varies state by state, city by city, community by community. Somehow, it seems reassuring"Build the wall," "Defund the police"these three-word slogans, which, oh my goodness, make it seem like thats all it will take. But again, when large groups are put under enough stress one way or another, theyll align with often ridiculously simplistic, almost childish solutions and actually try to implement them, and thats dangerous, of course.
Rob Henderson:To some extent, I understand politics works the way it works, and you want to build a broad coalition, and sometimes messages get simplified or diluted. But for people who hold some prominence and some influence in society, there should be a greater sense of responsibility there, I think, to add a bit of the nuance and the complexity and to really consider how this will affect other people. Just to bring this back around for a moment to some of the themes of the earlier parts of my bookone thing that I didnt really consider until I wrote those early chapters was howwell, I guess I can approach it fromessentially, the point is that young children have no power. I mentioned theyre completely powerless on an individual level; they dont exert much agency in their own lives, which is, for the most part, correct because if youre a child, youre unsophisticated and immature, and you dont know whats best for you. So, you would hope that adults would do the right thing and provide care and guidance and so forth. But then also, on a political level, children cant vote, and so they have no power there either.
To some extent, I understand politics works the way it works, and you want to build a broad coalition, and sometimes messages get simplified or diluted. But for people who hold some prominence and some influence in society, there should be a greater sense of responsibility there, I think, to add a bit of the nuance and the complexity and to really consider how this will affect other people. Just to bring this back around for a moment to some of the themes of the earlier parts of my bookone thing that I didnt really consider until I wrote those early chapters was howwell, I guess I can approach it fromessentially, the point is that young children have no power. I mentioned theyre completely powerless on an individual level; they dont exert much agency in their own lives, which is, for the most part, correct because if youre a child, youre unsophisticated and immature, and you dont know whats best for you. So, you would hope that adults would do the right thing and provide care and guidance and so forth. But then also, on a political level, children cant vote, and so they have no power there either.
Historically, its been a good thing that marginalized people have been able to unite and advocate on behalf of their own interests. They have been able to vote and exert pressure in various ways and so on and so forth. I think, generally speaking, thats been a good thing. But children will never be able to do that. They cant unite on behalf of their own interests. They are a group that experiences the world in the same ways and are historically mistreated in the same ways and all the kinds of things that all marginalized groups have suffered through, but theyll never be able to do what other groups have done on behalf of their own interest. So, something else to keep in mind is that adults really do have to bear in mind the level of responsibility we have for kids and recognize that these kids will become adults, and whatever experiences they have when theyre kids, this will have some downstream consequences on society as a whole. That was another point that I mademost kids who grew up the way that I did dont turn out like me; they turn out like some of my friends who were incarcerated and so on.
Joseph Lee:Its poverty of imagination that adults fail to imagine the experiences of children, fail to imagine the experiences of people who are not like them. That collapse of imagination and this collapse into literalism, and as you were saying, libertinism, sensuality, the meeting of primal drivesall of those things go to this collapse of imagination and consequently this diminishment of empathy. So much of the suffering that you experience, and children often do, is this interference with imagination that generates empathy, and that is often a sign both of environmental problems as well as personal developmental problems in those adults. So, it is a spectacularly complicated both personal and societal issue. Youve mentioned the word policy several times, so I am kind of curious if you are working with any policymakers or if you yourself have certain ideas about policy changes that you think would be valuable to consider.
Its poverty of imagination that adults fail to imagine the experiences of children, fail to imagine the experiences of people who are not like them. That collapse of imagination and this collapse into literalism, and as you were saying, libertinism, sensuality, the meeting of primal drivesall of those things go to this collapse of imagination and consequently this diminishment of empathy. So much of the suffering that you experience, and children often do, is this interference with imagination that generates empathy, and that is often a sign both of environmental problems as well as personal developmental problems in those adults. So, it is a spectacularly complicated both personal and societal issue. Youve mentioned the word policy several times, so I am kind of curious if you are working with any policymakers or if you yourself have certain ideas about policy changes that you think would be valuable to consider.
Rob Henderson:Yeah, you know, Im not a policy wonk. Im more interested in individual-level behavioral changewhat can we do at the individual or perhaps the family level? As far as policy goes, I have thought about thishave there been successful policy changes that we could potentially implement? Historically, has anything led to mass behavioral change in a positive direction? One thing that comes to mind is the anti-smoking campaigns of the 80s and the 90s. I think a lot of peopleif you traveled back to 1980 and said something like, "In the future, 12% of Americans will smoke cigarettes instead of whatever it was back then, something on the order of 30 to 40%," I think that would have shocked a lot of people. But that was a sort of sustained public awareness campaign of the harmful effects of tobacco. Even when I was a kid in the 90s, I would see these commercialslike every third commercial, "Smoking will kill you." It didnt stop me from smoking, but it had an effect on someone, and it did seem to work. Even to this day, if you buy a pack of cigarettes, it still has a warning label on it. Who doesnt know smoking is bad for you? But I think theres something to be said for sort of reinforcing the knowledge repeatedly. You can know something, but its still helpful to just have it reinforced and repeated. I think something like this maybe could be done for family formation, for examplepublic awareness campaigns of, "If youre a child whos raised by two married parents who have a healthy relationship, youre X% less likely to be incarcerated or X% more likely to graduate from high school," and so on and so forth, something like that. I could imagine this would upset some people, so it would have to be framed in a delicate way. So, I think something like that might potentially be helpful. But thats the only sort of policy-related idea I havea kind of public awareness campaign. The other would bethis isnt related to policy, but just more people sharing their stories. Im hoping that my book may encourage other people out there with similar stories to share their experiences too. Stories had a large effect on me when I was a kid, and kids pay no attention to policy, but they will pay attention to stories. So, Im hoping more people will communicate their own experiences in that way too.
Yeah, you know, Im not a policy wonk. Im more interested in individual-level behavioral changewhat can we do at the individual or perhaps the family level? As far as policy goes, I have thought about thishave there been successful policy changes that we could potentially implement? Historically, has anything led to mass behavioral change in a positive direction? One thing that comes to mind is the anti-smoking campaigns of the 80s and the 90s. I think a lot of peopleif you traveled back to 1980 and said something like, "In the future, 12% of Americans will smoke cigarettes instead of whatever it was back then, something on the order of 30 to 40%," I think that would have shocked a lot of people. But that was a sort of sustained public awareness campaign of the harmful effects of tobacco. Even when I was a kid in the 90s, I would see these commercialslike every third commercial, "Smoking will kill you." It didnt stop me from smoking, but it had an effect on someone, and it did seem to work. Even to this day, if you buy a pack of cigarettes, it still has a warning label on it. Who doesnt know smoking is bad for you? But I think theres something to be said for sort of reinforcing the knowledge repeatedly. You can know something, but its still helpful to just have it reinforced and repeated. I think something like this maybe could be done for family formation, for examplepublic awareness campaigns of, "If youre a child whos raised by two married parents who have a healthy relationship, youre X% less likely to be incarcerated or X% more likely to graduate from high school," and so on and so forth, something like that. I could imagine this would upset some people, so it would have to be framed in a delicate way. So, I think something like that might potentially be helpful. But thats the only sort of policy-related idea I havea kind of public awareness campaign. The other would bethis isnt related to policy, but just more people sharing their stories. Im hoping that my book may encourage other people out there with similar stories to share their experiences too. Stories had a large effect on me when I was a kid, and kids pay no attention to policy, but they will pay attention to stories. So, Im hoping more people will communicate their own experiences in that way too.
Deborah Stewart:I was thinking of J.D. VancesHillbilly Elegy. Its a different kind of story, but its another young boy raised in environments that are tremendously averse and tragic. So, I think there is a willingness, as youre experiencing, as Vance has, and others, to hear and to listen and to see. How thats going to enter into the collective and what the collective will do in response to that remains to be seen.
I was thinking of J.D. Vances
. Its a different kind of story, but its another young boy raised in environments that are tremendously averse and tragic. So, I think there is a willingness, as youre experiencing, as Vance has, and others, to hear and to listen and to see. How thats going to enter into the collective and what the collective will do in response to that remains to be seen.
Joseph Lee:This whole capacity to influence the collective consciousness of a countryI mean, this was something that psychologists have been interested in for a long time. Of course, a horrific example was what we saw in Germany leading up to World War II, but this understanding that as media has continued to expand its influence, the ability to influence the collective grows for good or ill. But I remember the campaigns, for instance, in the 70sthere was an enormous anti-littering campaign that was very, very effective. I mean, it looks bizarre to see somebody throw a bag of garbage out of their car window on the highway. Thats shocking now. When I was a kid, you drove down the highway, and there were mountains of trash on most any highway you drove. It was ubiquitous to see somebody throw ayou know, God knowsa mattress out the window. And thats really changed. But there does have to be this feeling, often at a federal level, that there is a particular virtue.
This whole capacity to influence the collective consciousness of a countryI mean, this was something that psychologists have been interested in for a long time. Of course, a horrific example was what we saw in Germany leading up to World War II, but this understanding that as media has continued to expand its influence, the ability to influence the collective grows for good or ill. But I remember the campaigns, for instance, in the 70sthere was an enormous anti-littering campaign that was very, very effective. I mean, it looks bizarre to see somebody throw a bag of garbage out of their car window on the highway. Thats shocking now. When I was a kid, you drove down the highway, and there were mountains of trash on most any highway you drove. It was ubiquitous to see somebody throw ayou know, God knowsa mattress out the window. And thats really changed. But there does have to be this feeling, often at a federal level, that there is a particular virtue.
Deborah Stewart:Yeah, it goes to the cultivation of virtue, doesnt it?
Yeah, it goes to the cultivation of virtue, doesnt it?
Joseph Lee:Yeah, exactly.
Yeah, exactly.
Joseph Lee:The cultivation of a virtue, and often relative to the collective, something that can be seen in a very concrete way"Dont smoke," "Dont litter"again, very short slogans. But to be able to stimulate affect and be able toI can still remember the anti-littering commercials.
The cultivation of a virtue, and often relative to the collective, something that can be seen in a very concrete way"Dont smoke," "Dont litter"again, very short slogans. But to be able to stimulate affect and be able toI can still remember the anti-littering commercials.
Rob Henderson:I remember them too.
I remember them too.
Joseph Lee:In my mind, the weeping Native American at the side of the highwaytotally iconic. And it changed the nation. So, I feel into what youre saying. The difficulty, of course, is what is the message that the unconscious of the nation will take in and make their own? By the way, if you havent seenThe Century of the Self, its a fantastic BBC series about the birth of mass marketing, which interestingly was founded by Freuds nephew, who applied psychoanalytic theory. He was the one who convinced women that they should smoke as a symbol of establishing their freedom and taking power into their own hands. Then the massive amount of effort it has taken to unwind that idea in the collective, as if the collective is its own psycheone great vast psychology. So, its a challenge, isnt it?
In my mind, the weeping Native American at the side of the highwaytotally iconic. And it changed the nation. So, I feel into what youre saying. The difficulty, of course, is what is the message that the unconscious of the nation will take in and make their own? By the way, if you havent seen
, its a fantastic BBC series about the birth of mass marketing, which interestingly was founded by Freuds nephew, who applied psychoanalytic theory. He was the one who convinced women that they should smoke as a symbol of establishing their freedom and taking power into their own hands. Then the massive amount of effort it has taken to unwind that idea in the collective, as if the collective is its own psycheone great vast psychology. So, its a challenge, isnt it?
Deborah Stewart:Well, I think were saying its boththat there are things we can do at the macro or collective level, like anti-smoking campaigns, but those are designed to affect individuals. Its not policy; its "Dont litter," "Dont smoke." What were seeing now is the birth rate is declining in the United States and in other so-called First World countries because people are making individual decisions based on, "Oh my gosh, I dont think Im ready to have children. I cant really afford to raise children in the way that they should be raised." So, thats been maybe an effect that is not altogether intended. Nonetheless, its a trend of, "You dont just couple up when youre 19 or 25 years old and just go ahead and have a family anymore." Now its a conscious decision for many people of, "Wait a minute," and people are putting off having children until theyve got some financial security or have really gained some traction in a career. I see that as related somewhat to this. What weve bypassed in our discussion, and what I think is really difficult, is social policy because there are so many unintended consequences. How do we affect change?
Well, I think were saying its boththat there are things we can do at the macro or collective level, like anti-smoking campaigns, but those are designed to affect individuals. Its not policy; its "Dont litter," "Dont smoke." What were seeing now is the birth rate is declining in the United States and in other so-called First World countries because people are making individual decisions based on, "Oh my gosh, I dont think Im ready to have children. I cant really afford to raise children in the way that they should be raised." So, thats been maybe an effect that is not altogether intended. Nonetheless, its a trend of, "You dont just couple up when youre 19 or 25 years old and just go ahead and have a family anymore." Now its a conscious decision for many people of, "Wait a minute," and people are putting off having children until theyve got some financial security or have really gained some traction in a career. I see that as related somewhat to this. What weve bypassed in our discussion, and what I think is really difficult, is social policy because there are so many unintended consequences. How do we affect change?
Rob Henderson:Yeah.
Yeah.
Deborah Stewart:And then there are people like us, right? Where we do it, where theres a lot of individual work. But thats a big questionhow do we affect change? So, I interrupted you.
And then there are people like us, right? Where we do it, where theres a lot of individual work. But thats a big questionhow do we affect change? So, I interrupted you.
Rob Henderson:On this point of the declining fertility rate, I just read this analysis inThe Economistwhich found that when they separate the fertility rate by education level among women, they find that college-educated womentheir fertility rate actually hasnt changed that much in the past few decades. Theyre having children later in life, but the overall number of children remains roughly the same. Whereas for non-college-educated women, for working-class women, the fertility rate has completely collapsed, and that is actually whats largely responsible. Im reading this, and Im thinking about my own life experiences. There were various points in my childhood where I lived with teenage girls who were teen moms, and their daughters are growing up now, and theyre in their 20s, and they havent had kids. I myself am arguably an example of this, where my mother was young when she had me, and I dont have any children. So, I do wonder how much of thisthere are a variety of forces here: technology, education, and prolonged waiting, and so on and so forth. But I do wonder how much of the attitudes around marriage have changed this, and how much of the kind ofweve talked about traumaof a generation ago, if you were a young woman from a working-class background, a lot of these women would have children with men, and that would actually lead them on a path to marriage with the father of their children. Most of the time, that never happened. So, they raised these kids as single parents, single moms, and those daughters grew up with their mom and no one else, and they never saw what a healthy relationship looked like, unlike their mom. So, the teen moms of a generation ago were raised by two parents, so they still held out the hope that, "Okay, well, fine, Im with this guy, and were sleeping together, and I have a kid, and maybe we just kind of attempt this, and maybe itll lead to something like marriage," and it never did. Their daughters grew up, their kids grew up, and never even witnessed what marriage looked like, what a healthy relationship looked like, and so theyre just not having kids at all. The culture that they grew up in also didnt really prioritize marriage or communicate the importance of marriage. The vast majority of people still, if you ask them about family formation, most people still want to be married before they have kids. So, all of this is to say that I do wonder how much of the fertility crisis is actually a marriage crisis, and how much of it is a result of the trauma and stress of growing up in a family where youve never actually seen what a healthy relationship looks like.
On this point of the declining fertility rate, I just read this analysis in
which found that when they separate the fertility rate by education level among women, they find that college-educated womentheir fertility rate actually hasnt changed that much in the past few decades. Theyre having children later in life, but the overall number of children remains roughly the same. Whereas for non-college-educated women, for working-class women, the fertility rate has completely collapsed, and that is actually whats largely responsible. Im reading this, and Im thinking about my own life experiences. There were various points in my childhood where I lived with teenage girls who were teen moms, and their daughters are growing up now, and theyre in their 20s, and they havent had kids. I myself am arguably an example of this, where my mother was young when she had me, and I dont have any children. So, I do wonder how much of thisthere are a variety of forces here: technology, education, and prolonged waiting, and so on and so forth. But I do wonder how much of the attitudes around marriage have changed this, and how much of the kind ofweve talked about traumaof a generation ago, if you were a young woman from a working-class background, a lot of these women would have children with men, and that would actually lead them on a path to marriage with the father of their children. Most of the time, that never happened. So, they raised these kids as single parents, single moms, and those daughters grew up with their mom and no one else, and they never saw what a healthy relationship looked like, unlike their mom. So, the teen moms of a generation ago were raised by two parents, so they still held out the hope that, "Okay, well, fine, Im with this guy, and were sleeping together, and I have a kid, and maybe we just kind of attempt this, and maybe itll lead to something like marriage," and it never did. Their daughters grew up, their kids grew up, and never even witnessed what marriage looked like, what a healthy relationship looked like, and so theyre just not having kids at all. The culture that they grew up in also didnt really prioritize marriage or communicate the importance of marriage. The vast majority of people still, if you ask them about family formation, most people still want to be married before they have kids. So, all of this is to say that I do wonder how much of the fertility crisis is actually a marriage crisis, and how much of it is a result of the trauma and stress of growing up in a family where youve never actually seen what a healthy relationship looks like.
Deborah Stewart:Well, I hope that weve sort of been ableweve traveled really widely over this territory, and I hope weve at least done what we do, which is just open things up and begin a conversation about it and circumambulate it a little bit and look at it from different views.
Well, I hope that weve sort of been ableweve traveled really widely over this territory, and I hope weve at least done what we do, which is just open things up and begin a conversation about it and circumambulate it a little bit and look at it from different views.
Rob Henderson:Thank you so much for having me.
Thank you so much for having me.
Lisa Marchiano:Thank you for joining us.
Thank you for joining us.
Joseph Lee:Yeah, thank you very much, Rob.
Yeah, thank you very much, Rob.
Comments
Restacks
Laura A.
Laura A.
Laura A.
Laura A.
Laura A.
Aug 29
I watched this interview on This Jungian Life podcast. Very interesting and very different from your other interviews.
I watched this interview on This Jungian Life podcast. Very interesting and very different from your other interviews.
Like (3)
Reply
Share
COMRADITY
COMRADITY
COMRADITY
COMRADITY
COMRADITY
Aug 29
Edited
Your outside looking in experience at Yale  is really interesting to me because I experience it in a different way. Im weird in that I am creative and analytical at the same time.  Because of my creativity I have found myself working with or leading creative people. Only recently have I had the luxury to be creative myself.
Your outside looking in experience at Yale  is really interesting to me because I experience it in a different way. Im weird in that I am creative and analytical at the same time.  Because of my creativity I have found myself working with or leading creative people. Only recently have I had the luxury to be creative myself.
The creative process has stages that evolve, from mimicking others, to questioning, to the rare eureka from having the courage to put ideas together in a unique way that has a sound, look, message that is surprising and resonates.
The creative process has stages that evolve, from mimicking others, to questioning, to the rare eureka from having the courage to put ideas together in a unique way that has a sound, look, message that is surprising and resonates.
Importantly, it is the questioning that wakes up the subconscious side of the brain where the unexpected connections are made. Creative people lead change by having the courage to question beliefs, make this leap, and express a new vision that resonates.
Importantly, it is the questioning that wakes up the subconscious side of the brain where the unexpected connections are made. Creative people lead change by having the courage to question beliefs, make this leap, and express a new vision that resonates.
The Yale students who express their luxury beliefs as a badge of class are stuck in the mimicking stage. They arent leading.
The Yale students who express their luxury beliefs as a badge of class are stuck in the mimicking stage. They arent leading.
Look forward to more of your courage to ask good questions and connecting old ideas in a new way.
Look forward to more of your courage to ask good questions and connecting old ideas in a new way.
Like (3)
Reply
Share
Top
Latest
Discussions

Rob Henderson

Rob Henderson

Rob Henderson

Rob Henderson

Rob Henderson

Rob Henderson

Rob Henderson

Rob Henderson

Rob Henderson

Rob Henderson


undefined subscriptions will be displayed on your profile (edit)
Skip for now
For your security, we need to re-authenticate you.
Click the link we sent to sasha.p.podolsky@gmail.com, orclick here to sign in.