

1
Book meeting
Book a meeting
David Meja, a Professor of Philosophy in Madrid, Spain,recently interviewed meforEl Mundo, a Spanish newspaper.
David Meja, a Professor of Philosophy in Madrid, Spain,
for
, a Spanish newspaper.
Theinterviewwas published in Spanish.
The
was published in Spanish.
Though I amhalflatinx/latine by ancestry (my biological father was Mexican), I can only speak a bit of broken Spanglish as a result of growing up in California with lots of Mexican friends.
Though I am
latinx/latine by ancestry (my biological father was Mexican), I can only speak a bit of broken Spanglish as a result of growing up in California with lots of Mexican friends.
You can read the English translation of my interview below:
The Sunday magazine of EL MUNDO
Robert K. Henderson's childhood and youth were not easy. His memoirs, *Troubled: A Memoir of Family, Foster Care, and Social Class* begin like this: My name is Robert Kim Henderson. Each of my three names was taken from a different adult. These three adults have something in common: they all abandoned me. Robert is the name of his biological father, whom he never knew; Kim is the surname of his biological mother, a young South Korean student consumed by drug addiction. Rob retains memories of living in a car and later in a gloomy apartment where his mother tied him to a chair to drug herself in peace. Rob was three years old when his mother was arrested, and he entered the foster care system in Los Angeles County. Shortly after, his mother was deported. He has never seen her again. Henderson is the surname of his adoptive father, who decided to remove him from his life when the couple divorced. Rob went through several foster homes until he was adopted by the Hendersons. With them, his life improved, but he continued to fail, consume, and get into fights. His survival instinct led him to enlist in the army after finishing high school. He learned discipline, rehabilitated, and was able to study at university. Today he is a Yale graduate and holds a PhD in Psychology from the University of Cambridge, has a column in *The Boston Globe*, and a newsletter with tens of thousands of subscribers. His intellectual concerns, well condensed in the concept of "luxury beliefs," are inseparable from this improbable life trajectory narrated in a book that is already a bestseller in the United States.
Meja:One of the most important theses in the book is that a family's income level is not as important as its stability.
One of the most important theses in the book is that a family's income level is not as important as its stability.
Henderson:At Yale, there were many discussions about poverty and inequality, and I remember moments of scarcity as a child, but I have long been skeptical of the idea that material factors are the most important predictors for life outcomes. I have seen people with similar economic conditions take very different paths.
At Yale, there were many discussions about poverty and inequality, and I remember moments of scarcity as a child, but I have long been skeptical of the idea that material factors are the most important predictors for life outcomes. I have seen people with similar economic conditions take very different paths.
I have friends who did okay and friends who ended up in prison, and the differential factor was not their economic situation, but often their family situation. The truth is that there are many academic works that demonstrate this thesis: instability in childhood is a much more important predictor of adult outcomes than poverty. We can invest all we want in schools and education, but it will be useless if at three in the afternoon a child returns to a home where they experience indifference and live with chaos and uncertainty.
Meja:You arrived at Yale at the dawn of the woke culture. You listened to privileged young people talk about inequality and social justice.
You arrived at Yale at the dawn of the woke culture. You listened to privileged young people talk about inequality and social justice.
Henderson:The idea of equality at elite universities is that the most privileged 1% should be representative of society's demographics. As long as the top 1% is 50% women, and x percent Hispanic, x percent LGBT, and so on, then everything is perfectly fine. The remaining 99% of the population does not matter, nor does what happens in poor and marginalized neighborhoods. If elite universities can say that they have recruited more black students this year, they will say they are contributing to social justice. And what they are really doing is depriving poor communities of their most talented members while they remain mired in misery. The theory seems to be analogous to trickle-down economics: if we can place members of these historically marginalized groups in positions of power, somehow the benefits will magically trickle down to their communities. But the reality is that these universities are not concerned with giving opportunities to the truly marginalized or fostering a fairer system, but rather with appearing as heroic defenders of justice.
The idea of equality at elite universities is that the most privileged 1% should be representative of society's demographics. As long as the top 1% is 50% women, and x percent Hispanic, x percent LGBT, and so on, then everything is perfectly fine. The remaining 99% of the population does not matter, nor does what happens in poor and marginalized neighborhoods. If elite universities can say that they have recruited more black students this year, they will say they are contributing to social justice. And what they are really doing is depriving poor communities of their most talented members while they remain mired in misery. The theory seems to be analogous to trickle-down economics: if we can place members of these historically marginalized groups in positions of power, somehow the benefits will magically trickle down to their communities. But the reality is that these universities are not concerned with giving opportunities to the truly marginalized or fostering a fairer system, but rather with appearing as heroic defenders of justice.
Meja:Isn't it racist to consider that being of a certain race implies a certain worldview?
Isn't it racist to consider that being of a certain race implies a certain worldview?
Henderson:Yes, one of the justifications for diversity is that it brings a wide range of perspectives. And this implies that external characteristics reliably correlate with having a certain point of view, which does suggest racism, or a variant of stereotyping peoples opinions based on superficial characteristics.
Yes, one of the justifications for diversity is that it brings a wide range of perspectives. And this implies that external characteristics reliably correlate with having a certain point of view, which does suggest racism, or a variant of stereotyping peoples opinions based on superficial characteristics.
Meja:Yale University was worried about what you might say in the book.
Yale University was worried about what you might say in the book.
Henderson:A few years ago, I wrotean articlein The Wall Street Journal about my experience at Yale and the racial tensions, which were mostly against whites. The university did not like that I wrote that. It's curious that these centuries-old institutions are so sensitive to supposed bad publicity. But as I have commented, their goal is not to be great transmitters of knowledge, but champions of social justice. Then there are the students, who want everything: they want to be rebels and social justice warriors, but not deviate from their path to professional success. They don't want their activism to deter them from their position at McKinsey or Goldman Sachs, and they even hope that their activism will help pave the way to future wealth and status. There's the story of that kid who applied to several elite universities, and in one of the supplemental essays to the question "What causes matter?", heresponded100 times: "Black Lives Matter"... He received admission to Yale, Stanford, and other top universities.
A few years ago, I wrote
in The Wall Street Journal about my experience at Yale and the racial tensions, which were mostly against whites. The university did not like that I wrote that. It's curious that these centuries-old institutions are so sensitive to supposed bad publicity. But as I have commented, their goal is not to be great transmitters of knowledge, but champions of social justice. Then there are the students, who want everything: they want to be rebels and social justice warriors, but not deviate from their path to professional success. They don't want their activism to deter them from their position at McKinsey or Goldman Sachs, and they even hope that their activism will help pave the way to future wealth and status. There's the story of that kid who applied to several elite universities, and in one of the supplemental essays to the question "What causes matter?", he
100 times: "Black Lives Matter"... He received admission to Yale, Stanford, and other top universities.
Meja:Why did you study psychology?
Why did you study psychology?
Henderson:I suppose I have always been curious about human nature and social behavior. Before starting university, when I was still in the air force, I came acrossHow the Mind Worksby Steven Pinker. The title attracted me, I read the book, and I found it fascinating. Then I started reading more, watching psychology lectures on YouTube, and finally decided to study psychology in a formal way. University was also a change of social environment, and I was able to connect my readings with my observations.
I suppose I have always been curious about human nature and social behavior. Before starting university, when I was still in the air force, I came across
by Steven Pinker. The title attracted me, I read the book, and I found it fascinating. Then I started reading more, watching psychology lectures on YouTube, and finally decided to study psychology in a formal way. University was also a change of social environment, and I was able to connect my readings with my observations.
Meja:Social classes are one of your interests, I understand, due to the contrast between your childhood and what you find at Yale.
Social classes are one of your interests, I understand, due to the contrast between your childhood and what you find at Yale.
Henderson:At Yale, I encountered very different profiles from mine: children of the elites, young people who had been preparing all their lives to be at Yale, who knew how to behave and how to study: they knew how to prioritize tasks, worked very efficiently... And they knew what to say to be ideologically fashionable: in public, they defended radical identitarian ideas that they greatly moderated in private.
At Yale, I encountered very different profiles from mine: children of the elites, young people who had been preparing all their lives to be at Yale, who knew how to behave and how to study: they knew how to prioritize tasks, worked very efficiently... And they knew what to say to be ideologically fashionable: in public, they defended radical identitarian ideas that they greatly moderated in private.
Meja:Many of these ideas fit into the concept of luxury beliefs you coined a few years ago. To what extent is the concept indebted to Thorstein Veblen's theory?
Many of these ideas fit into the concept of luxury beliefs you coined a few years ago. To what extent is the concept indebted to Thorstein Veblen's theory?
Henderson:If I had not readThe Theory of the Leisure Classby Veblen, I probably would not have been able to make the connection between luxury goods toluxury beliefs.
If I had not read
by Veblen, I probably would not have been able to make the connection between luxury goods to
.
Meja:Perhaps the luxury belief par excellence is the call to defund the police, which some elites popularized after the murder of George Floyd.
Perhaps the luxury belief par excellence is the call to defund the police, which some elites popularized after the murder of George Floyd.
Henderson:Yes, which is curious because I coined the concept in 2019, before the movement formed. I never imagined that, in a matter of months, some elites would be calling for the abolition of law enforcement.
Yes, which is curious because I coined the concept in 2019, before the movement formed. I never imagined that, in a matter of months, some elites would be calling for the abolition of law enforcement.
Meja:Maybe that's why they are luxurious, because they are unimaginable for normal people.
Maybe that's why they are luxurious, because they are unimaginable for normal people.
Henderson:Look, in 2020, a book came out in defense of looting and received media attention from major progressive outlets like NPR because it was understood as a way to express discontent with capitalism and inequality.
Look, in 2020, a book came out in defense of looting and received media attention from major progressive outlets like NPR because it was understood as a way to express discontent with capitalism and inequality.
Meja:You also talk about polyamory as a luxury belief.
You also talk about polyamory as a luxury belief.
Henderson:At Yale, a friend told me that marriage and monogamy were outdated customs that we should overcome. But she had benefited from a stable upbringing and was clear that she wanted to form a traditional family. These ideas not only dont have a cost, but rather provide status to those who repeat them because they distance themselves from normal people, which is what it is about. Most people do not have university degrees. Middle-class people tend to think that marriage is an aspiration and do not believe that society should abandon it. They also do not think that the police are bad. The masses tend to be more temperamentally conservative, and therefore the elites have to adopt the opposite positions to distance themselves from them. They trust that adopting peculiar ideas will make them appear sophisticated to their peers. But if the result of this belief is that your status is elevated and there are negative external consequences for others, it is something you should think about. In the 1960s, 95% of children born in the US were raised by their two biological parents, regardless of their social class. In the 1980s, after two decades of promoting free love, the figure for poor and working class families had plummeted to 30%, while for upper class families it remained at 85%.
At Yale, a friend told me that marriage and monogamy were outdated customs that we should overcome. But she had benefited from a stable upbringing and was clear that she wanted to form a traditional family. These ideas not only dont have a cost, but rather provide status to those who repeat them because they distance themselves from normal people, which is what it is about. Most people do not have university degrees. Middle-class people tend to think that marriage is an aspiration and do not believe that society should abandon it. They also do not think that the police are bad. The masses tend to be more temperamentally conservative, and therefore the elites have to adopt the opposite positions to distance themselves from them. They trust that adopting peculiar ideas will make them appear sophisticated to their peers. But if the result of this belief is that your status is elevated and there are negative external consequences for others, it is something you should think about. In the 1960s, 95% of children born in the US were raised by their two biological parents, regardless of their social class. In the 1980s, after two decades of promoting free love, the figure for poor and working class families had plummeted to 30%, while for upper class families it remained at 85%.
Rob Henderson went through several foster homes and was an unruly youth before finding his place in the air force and earning a doctorate at Yale. "Elite universities are not concerned with giving opportunities to the marginalized, but with appearing as heroic defenders of justice," he says.
Meja:The book contains other striking statistics. Among them, that while 35% of Americans graduate from college, only 3% of foster children do. You achieved it thanks to the help of the military. How do you feel about the fact that the armed forces were the only social elevator accessible to someone like you?
The book contains other striking statistics. Among them, that while 35% of Americans graduate from college, only 3% of foster children do. You achieved it thanks to the help of the military. How do you feel about the fact that the armed forces were the only social elevator accessible to someone like you?
Henderson:The most important institution is the family. Even if all foster children miraculously graduated from an elite university and achieved other successes, nothing would compensate for the suffering of their early experiences. And I am convinced that if given the chance, they would make the same change I would be willing to make: a stable and healthy childhood, followed by a simple middle-class life, instead of 18 years of instability, even if they are followed by a successful story of social ascent.
The most important institution is the family. Even if all foster children miraculously graduated from an elite university and achieved other successes, nothing would compensate for the suffering of their early experiences. And I am convinced that if given the chance, they would make the same change I would be willing to make: a stable and healthy childhood, followed by a simple middle-class life, instead of 18 years of instability, even if they are followed by a successful story of social ascent.
ROB HENDERSON
Psychologist, columnist atThe Boston Globe, and bestselling essayist
Psychologist, columnist at
, and bestselling essayist
Comments
Restacks
Bob DeVoe
Bob DeVoe
Aug 1
I'm surprised he uses the word latinx as I don't think its used actively outside of elite (aka NPR) circles (and the X is silent - thus confusing for actual Spanish speaking people).
I'm surprised he uses the word latinx as I don't think its used actively outside of elite (aka NPR) circles (and the X is silent - thus confusing for actual Spanish speaking people).
Like (3)
Reply
Share
Its Just Me Dad
Its Just Me Dad
Aug 1
Family unity is the elixir
Family unity is the elixir
Like (3)
Reply
Share
Top
Latest
Discussions

Rob Henderson

Rob Henderson

Rob Henderson

Rob Henderson

Rob Henderson

Rob Henderson

Rob Henderson

Rob Henderson

Rob Henderson

Rob Henderson


undefined subscriptions will be displayed on your profile (edit)
Skip for now
For your security, we need to re-authenticate you.
Click the link we sent to sasha.p.podolsky@gmail.com, orclick here to sign in.