

1
Book meeting
Book a meeting
Below is the fifth chapter of my forthcomingbook,Troubled: A Memoir of Foster Care, Family, and Social Class.
Below is the fifth chapter of my forthcoming
,
Here are the links for thepreface,Chapter One,Chapter Two, andChapter Three, andChapter Four. Access is limited to paid subscribers.
Here are the links for the
,
,
, and
, and
. Access is limited to paid subscribers.
Ipreviouslyasked my readers to write a short review/reaction of these chapters, and send me the reviewhere on this form.  Upon the official date of publication (February 20, 2024), Ill request that you please share your review on Amazon or Goodreads.
I
asked my readers to write a short review/reaction of these chapters, and send me the review
.  Upon the official date of publication (February 20, 2024), Ill request that you please share your review on Amazon or Goodreads.
So far 28 readers have submitted reviews; Im aiming for at least 50.
As an added bonus, anyone who submits an early review will be eligible to join me on a 1-on-1 video call. When 50 reviews are submitted, I will select 10 reviewers at random and invite them to schedule a time to speak with me 1-on-1. Of course, if you send a review and then receive an email invitation from me asking if youd like to speak on a video call, you are obviously free to decline or ignore it. In that case, Ill just choose someone else. Basically, if you submit a review, you have a 1 in 5 chance of joining me for a conversation where you can ask me whatever you want. Questions about the book, psychology, human nature, social class, etc. Ordinarily, I charge a nontrivial rate for 1-on-1 meetings. But in this case, the only cost is writing a couple of sentences for a short review.
Writing books is difficult. But nowadays, writing itself is not the only hard part. More difficult is getting people to hear about a book or care about it in this media environment where a million things are competing for our attention. Reviews can make all the difference.
Pre-Order My Book
Pre-Order My Book
As youll read in this chapter, Ive been interested in biographies and memoirs since I was a kid. Its not uncommon to read accounts that describe a life full of exciting events but avoid exploring deeper personal issues, which gives the work a shallow quality. Ive always appreciated writers who can embrace their inner struggles and uncertainties, as it infuses their work and personalities with a richer and more profound quality.
I was grateful to see this review from someone on Goodreads. I also dislike angsty memoirs, especially from young authors. I tried to make sure mine doesnt have that vibe.

Writing this book was a strange experience, rummaging through the semi-conscious swirls of memory to untangle and relive some of these stories. Before putting it all down on paper, these recollections mostly existed as dusty artifacts in the locked museum of my mind.
Throughout the process, I came to learn that a memoir is not a mere recital of events. The author has to clothe the dry bones of personal stories in the flesh of living reality. To portray human beings and their social context in such a way as to give you, the reader, a sense of actually being there. A sense of the kind of society or kind of person you could imagine that you could have met or interacted with.
When a decent storyteller or memoirist communicates effectively, we can then figure out for ourselves why this person did this or that, without having every detail fully explained. This is becauseif the story is any good and the individuals in it are sufficiently drawnthe social abilities we use in our everyday lives have been activated. While reading, we recognize real people and notice their patterns and feel the thrill of surprise when they deviate from them. We then understand we have not been given a loose heap of personal anecdotes, but full immersion into another world.
Describing flawed people in real terms, giving a memoir the feeling of life, of something recognizably human, even at the risk of saying more than we can know with absolute certainty (can IproveI behaved as a thirteen-year-old in this way or thatbecauseof the reasons I describe?) brings into play those ways of understanding the social world which are intrinsic to our everyday experiences as human beings.
Memoirs, biographies, and autobiographies are necessarily imperfect reflections of reality. But they can capture something of human life in a way that other forms of writing or inquiry cannot.Alongside events that I can easily recall, I was surprised at how thefleeting and various wisps and fragments that also encompass my memories made their way into my book.
You definitely wouldnt find this type of writing in a social science paper. Empirical research and theoretical frameworks can illuminate patterns. But truly understanding human beings means acknowledging that they have unpredictable qualities that are, as the British philosopher Isaiah Berlin has written, too various and fugitive to be neatly captured and stuffed into a neat model of behavior.
This book is an attempt to journey into the heart of my experiences at various ages and understand what happened without blame or pity.
Spare, searching, and provocative, Rob Henderson chronicles an epic journey from an unstable childhood through foster care, the military, Yale, Cambridge, and now the preeminence needed to prick complacent consciences everywhere. Troubled is a powerful, moving, and necessary book.John Lewis Gaddis, Pulitzer Prize-winning author and Robert A. Lovett Professor of Military and Naval History at Yale University
Spare, searching, and provocative, Rob Henderson chronicles an epic journey from an unstable childhood through foster care, the military, Yale, Cambridge, and now the preeminence needed to prick complacent consciences everywhere. Troubled is a powerful, moving, and necessary book.
John Lewis Gaddis, Pulitzer Prize-winning author and Robert A. Lovett Professor of Military and Naval History at Yale University
Shortly after Mom had told me she was gay, I wondered what my friends and their parents would think. It was a different eraBritney Spears kissing Madonna was the edgiest thing on television, and kids regularly used gay as a synonym for bad. In the mid-2000s, more than half of all Americans reported that they believed same-sex marriage shouldnt be legal; by 2020 it dropped to 31 percent.
And Red Bluff, a rural, blue-collar town, was not exactly the most welcoming environment for gay couples. Cristianthe friend who Id drink tequila with while his chain-smoking mom was sequestered in her bedroomwas the first one Id told. He was the most open-minded and curious of all the kids I hung out with. And his mom was the nicest (or, in any case, was the most mentally checked out and least likely to care), so I felt like I could trust them first.
After I explained that Mom was gay, Cristian replied, Youre lucky, you know.
Luckylike winning the lottery? I mean, no one else you know has gay parents, I said, trying to figure out if he was joking or not.
Thats not true, theres that chubby kid a few blocks down. His mom lives with a woman, and some kids are saying shes probably a lesbo, Cristian said.
Oh yeah, I remember seeing them all together at Burger King. Okay, so whats lucky about it? I replied.
Your mom is with a girl. Or a woman, or whatever. Shes not going to bring random guys around. Thats lucky, Cristian said.
I knew what he meant but didnt know how to respond. So, I just said,Yeah. Shelly has been really cool.
Not that we always got along. Shelly and Mom sometimes tried to find male role models or father figures for mea male co-worker, or the husband of one of their friends, or the brother of so-and-so. I hated this and resisted any discussion of it. I was a stubborn kid and didnt want adults designating yet another unreliable quasi-parent for me. Id had enough of that.
Still, Moms and Shellys instincts were rightI did want a father figure. I just preferred to choose for myself who it would be. Id constructed makeshift role models from fragments of pop culture and television and books. These distant idols were reliablethere was no risk of them disappearing from my life.
A couple hours after the phone call, one of Moms friends picked me up to take me to the hospital. Mom was already at the emergency room. As her friend explained to me, Mom was in no condition to drive.
On the journey to the hospital, Moms friend explained what happened.
Shelly and Mom had met up with several of their friends at an outdoor shooting range.Theyd gone once before; this was their second time. One of their friends was firing her weapon, and it suddenly jammed.As she tried to figure out what was wrong, she carelessly moved the pistol around. Suddenly, the gun fired. Shelly was standing fifteen feet away, talking to a man and his young son. The bullet went straight into her lower back. Had Shelly not been standing there, the bullet would likely have killed the boy.
When we got to the hospital, I saw that Mom was still in tears. I hugged her while she explained that Shelly was in surgery. Some of their friends were in the waiting room, too. I asked why they wanted to learn how to shoot guns.They replied that sometimes women can be vulnerable, so they were learning how to protect themselves. For some reason, that made me think about boxing classes, and how we have to purposely put ourselves in danger to learn how to protect ourselves. I was thinking and overthinking, trying to keep my mind occupied.
Shellys daughters had arrived a bit later and brought my sister with them. Hannah and I were sitting on opposite sides of Mom in the waiting room, holding her hand and giving her tissues. Mom then whispered to us that she hadnt prayed since she lived with Grandma and Grandpa as a kid, but she asked us to pray with her that Shelly would be okay.We said a quiet prayer together. It reminded me of when wed visit my grandparents house and Grandma would pray before dinner. That had always comforted me. Mom promised God that if Shelly lived, she would start going to church again.
Hours had passed.The doctor told Mom and me that we could see Shelly later, but that for now only her daughters could go in-side the room to visit her. I asked why, and Mom glanced at me. The doctor looked at both of us and said that only family could go inside.
Arent we family? I asked.
Yes, but not legally, Mom said.
We walked back to the waiting room. I was fuming. I knew that Shellys daughters were related to her by blood and that was why they could go inside to visit her. But Mom and Hannah are not my blood relatives, I thought.
Would I get to visit them if something happened? Would anyone visit me if something happened to me? I refused to accept this stupid rule about family.
When Mom had finally fallen asleep,I got up and quietly walked into Shellys room. I immediately wished I hadnt. Shelly was unconscious, with tubes in her arms and down her throat. I couldnt believe this had happened to her. Yesterday she was totally fine, and now she was on the edge of death. How was this happening? I was terrified that Shelly wouldnt survive. I felt great affection for her. I had been rejected by other parental figures, yet Shelly chose to care for me. My heart was pounding in my chest, my throat was closing, and I felt like I couldnt breathe. Still, I refused to let myself cry. I was at war with myself, trying not to feel what my body was feeling. Sometimes actions and outcomes are linked, I thought. But sometimes, shit just happens.
Two months had passed since Shelly was discharged from the hospital with spinal cord damage. I alternated between feeling numb and distraught after the shooting, and I felt this need to prove to the world, and to myself, that I hadnt been affected by what had happened.
At school, I got into an argument with a kid named Jared. Id never gotten along with him. In middle school, he called a Black kid the N-word and the kid responded by punching Jared in the face. His favorite band was Insane Clown Posse and he talked about girls and sex nonstop even though hed never had a girlfriend. We were arguing about something unimportant and I was trying to find a way to get him pissed off enough to fight me. I looked at Jareds jersey.
What does the fourteen stand for? The number of dicks you sat on? I said.
He immediately got in my face and grabbed my shirt. After shoving each other and exchanging headlocks, I punched him three times, and he fell to the ground. I went to help him up, extending my hand, when his friend ran over and kicked my hand away. I was startled by how much it stung, until I saw that my attacker was wearing steel-toed boots.
Throughout the week, my index finger had become swollen and immobile. I didnt tell anyone except my friends because I didnt want to get in trouble for fighting. I concealed my hand by gingerly putting it into the pocket of my hoodie or covering it with my other hand. I didnt do any of my schoolwork for a couple of weeks because I couldnt write anything. I didnt even realize my finger was broken at first. My habit of disengaging from emotional pain had blunted my ability to feel physical pain.I sometimes pressed my inflamed purple finger against hard surfaces and discovered that, to some degree, I enjoyed the sensation. It forced me to concentrate on one acute feeling and ignore everything else.
Weeks later, my finger healed on its own.The rest of me remained unwell.
Well into my first year of high school, I was still reeling from seeing Shelly on the verge of death. I never told anyone Id snuck into the hospital room to see her.Within a day or so, we learned that she would live.But it was unclear whether she would be able to regain full use of her legs. She had to attend physical therapy for the next several months.To get around, she used a walker with tennis balls on the bottom, like Grandpa did. It was hard for me to see her like this. To me, shed always been a steady and reliable figure.
Mom would later say that after Shelly got shot, Everything changed.There was a shift in the emotional configuration of our house. Of course, we all felt stressed and uncertain about Shellys in-jury and recovery process.But bills were also accumulating because
Mom took time off work to help care for Shelly while she recov-ered, and Shelly was obviously unable to work.Anxiety over money and responsibilities permeated the house. On top of all this, Mom and Shelly were frustrated by their interactions with the shooter and her insurance company. As a result of the contentious discussions concerning money, their friendship with the shooter had grown cold. Shelly was trying to recover, and Mom was trying her best to help her, and both were doing their best to keep the family financially afloat. Gradually, the routines that were so crucial for me in middle school had dissipated.
Shelly had typically been the one to cook, so family dinners stopped.We started using the microwave a lot, and Mom supplemented frozen meals with Top Ramen, Shasta sodas, and toaster pastries (generic Pop-Tarts from Walmart). I drank soda and ate snacks, sometimes because I was hungry, sometimes out of boredom, and sometimes to distract myself from my feelings. Hannah was spend-ing more and more time at her dads. I missed her, but I didnt blame her. I figured she was trying to get away from the family turmoil in the aftermath of the shooting.
At school, I tried to remember what Old Joe and others had told me about how up until now, my grades had been a trial run, and that my academic performance in high school was what really counted. But my grades took a nosedive.
I just couldnt bring myself to exert the effort required to excel in school. I was absolutely devastated and didnt know how to express this to anyone. I didnt even know exactly what it was that I was feeling. I was in the midst of adolescence, when the body delivers a massive dose of hormones. A messed-up childhood, family tragedy, distracted parents, and puberty. This potent cocktail guaranteed that I would talk to no one about what I was feeling and find other ways to cope instead.
In the middle of my freshman year,Shelly and I talked a little about what had happened. I asked how she was doing. She was in a recliner in the living room.
Im going to be okay, Rob, she said, muting the TV.I just thank God it was me and not you.
What do you meanwhy would you say that? I asked. Your mom and I wanted you to come with us that day, but you wanted to be on your own, she said.
I forgot about that, I said quietly.
In the foster homes, Id always wanted to have a family and stay close with them, but now, ironically, being separated had kept me safe.
They told me you were standing in front of a little boy, and that he would have been killed if you werent standing there. You saved that kid.
I stayed with her for a little while longer. When I noticed shed fallen asleep, I walked outside to buy cigarettes and weed from my neighbor.
My neighbor was this tall dude with glasses who lived nearby. I met him at the school bus stop during my first week of high school.
You must be a freshman, right? he asked.
Yeah man, I said. How about you?
Im a sophomore.
He looked a little old for a sophomore. I was about to ask if hed been held back but figured it was none of my business. I later learned he wasnt a student at all. Hed dropped out and would hang out at high-school bus stops looking for prospective customers. I looked at the headphones around his neck and saw the outline of a portable CD player in the pocket of his hoodie.
What are you listening to? I asked him.
Nelly, he said. He pulled out a cigarette. Smoking at the bus stop? I thought. This guy must be hardcore.
You want one? He pointed his pack to me.
Im good, I said, looking around.Can I get one later?
I can get you whatever you need.
He told me where he lived and when I could drop by.
The kids in the neighborhood called him Julius, even though it wasnt his real name. I asked him if it was his middle name and he said no; he got the name because hed had a seizure as a kid, and one of his friends called him Julius Seizure. It then got shortened to Julius. I went to his place every so often to get cigarettes, weed, and sometimes booze. Occasionally, Julius gave me some hydrocodone (generic Vicodin) or Triple C cold medicine hoping Id come back and buy some more. A few years later, California enacted laws restricting sales of certain kinds of cold medicine to minors because they were so widely abused to get high.
One day I was walking from school to a nearby park before Muay Thai class. Once I left the view of the school so that teachers couldnt see me, I pulled out a joint and started smoking.
Yo, is that you, Rob? Wait up, man!
I glanced over my shoulder and saw Tyler, a kid from one of my classes.With everything going on in my life, I didnt want new friends and definitely didnt feel like talking to Tyler today.
Rob! he kept calling. He ran and caught up next to me. Hey man, he said.
Hey, I replied blankly. Whats up?
Not much, bro. Can I share that? Tyler asked.Ill pay you back tomorrow.
Tyler was a tough kid who spent a lot of time in the high school weight room. He looked sort of like a young, muscular Alec Baldwin.I didnt know if I could trust him to actually pay me back. I had plenty of weed though, and figured he might be a future contact to get more later.
We finished the joint off.
He took out a pocket knife and cut a hole into an empty Rockstar can to use it as a pipe. I pulled out some more weed Id bought that morning from my neighbor.
We sat at a picnic table in a local park, took a few hits, and talked for a while. First about school and girls, and later about more personal stuff. I gave him vague answers about my family life, and I appreciated that he didnt seem to notice how guarded I was.That school year, we were in the same circle of friends.
Tyler had never met his dad, who had been arrested many times, mostly for drug-related offenses, and was now in jail for stabbing someone. His mom was a drug addict, and he hadnt seen her in years. He lived with his grandma, whom he sometimes called Mom, on the outskirts of Red Bluff, which was basically the middle of nowhere. One night when he stayed over, I showed him a clip from an old Chris Rock stand up special where he said,If a kid calls his grandma mommy, and his mama Pam, hes going to jail. Tyler thought this was hilarious.
One of my other good friends,John,and his brother Tom lived with their dad, who had been divorced five times.Their mom lived in Sacramento. She left their dad after learning that hed been cheat-ing on her with multiple women.
Cristian, at this point, still lived with his mom. He had lost all contact with his dad, who had recently been arrested again.
Antonio was our only friend who lived with both of his birth parents. His dad was a middle-school teacher, and they lived in a nice house in town.They had a spacious living room with high ceilings, a large kitchen, and an in-ground swimming pool in their backyard.Antonio played football for the school and was generally well liked. His parents were not so involved in his life, though. He never had to check in with them or anything when hed hang out with us, and his grades were as bad as ours even though his dad was a teacher.There were rumors that his dad was cheating on his mom, but we never knew for sure.
Once I was walking to a party with Antonio and a girl hed been seeing for a few days.Along the way we ran into some of her friends. One of them pulled out a baggie of cocaine and asked if we wanted to do a gummie. I asked what that was. She licked her finger, put it in the bag, and then rubbed it along her gums with her fingertip, like people do when they forget their toothbrush.
Not long after that, I was hanging out with one of these girls, Sarah, at her place.We were both sophomores by this point. Her mom usually had random guys over, sometimes more than one at a timejust like my birth mother had done. Sarah told me that ever since she was a little girl, her mom had been like that.We were chilling on the couch watching Lost when she pulled out a bag of meth. She asked if I wanted to try. Id always been grossed out by the stench. Once again I said no thanks and rolled a joint while she smoked.
My friends and I were impressed when Cristian told us he got a job at a local sandwich shop.This was really something to us. Even though we got into mischief, we still wanted to be seen as mature. Being called immature was a big insult. Maturity, for us, meant something like being able to drive,having access to drugs and beer,and having a job.It meant you werent just a kid anymore.Maturity meant having the means and the freedom to get into trouble. It meant not having to ask permission to do anythingit almost meant the same thing as cool. That was our adolescence: precocity followed by arrested development. Fifteen-year-olds acting like they were twenty-one, and twenty-one-year-olds acting like they were fifteen.
Seeing Cristian get a job was motivating. I wanted to get one too so I could save up for a car. Cristian told me he got a job by just going to different places and asking for an application.Then he went into the businesses every week to check in.After a few weeks, the sandwich shop interviewed him and then offered him the job.Thats it? I thought. I could do that. I told Mom and Shelly my plan, and they supported it.They added, though, that Id have to keep my grades up if I got a job. Fortunately, they were too dis-tracted to keep track of that.
By this point, Id been hiding my report cards from Mom and Shelly.We were visiting my grandparents when I realized my first sophomore report card was likely to arrive in the mail that day. I called Cristian and asked him to steal it from our mailbox. He walked all the way across town to fish my report card out and handed it over the next time I saw him.
I opened it and looked at my grades. Cs and Ds. I was pleasantly surprised that I wasnt failing anything. I walked into the kitchen and rummaged through the drawers, digging out some old documents with Moms signature on them. I went back to my room and practiced copying her handwriting.After a few tries, I forged Moms signature on the report card to acknowledgethat she had seen that I was in danger of failing, then I returned it to the school. These were the good old days, just a few years before parents could look up their kids grades online.
I spent more time figuring out how to do just enough to pass classes than simply doing the assignments. Id get an A on a test, look at the different weighted percentages for each type of assignment, and then try to figure out how much homework Id be able to skip to still maintain a C-minus in the class.
There was a girl who sat in front of me in math class. We competed on the tests sometimes to see who could score higher. She earned a higher score half the time, and Id outscore on the other half.But at the end of the semester,she got an A in the class, and I got a C, because she did all the homework, and I did none. I would read the textbook and practice doing the math exercises. But I had no interest in getting a good gradeI simply wanted to pass the class.
I reverted to the same habits as my ten-year-old self. I slept dur-ing class,and my teachers sent me to sit outside or sent me off to sit in another class. Still, some teachers were surprised when theyd ask the class a question and Id give the right answer. Once my history teacher asked me,How did you know that? because hed asked a question from a chapter we hadnt yet read. I told him Id read the textbook already,which was true.He told me to stay after class,and I figured he was going to chew me out for being a smartass.
After class, he asked me if what I had said about reading the textbook was true.When I said it was, he told me I had potential but was letting my bad habits get the better of me. I knew what he meant, but I told him that I didnt see the point in trying harder.
And what about your future? he asked. Look, its not like Im going to college, I said.
That is not written in stone, Rob. That is a choice you are making, he replied.
Yeah, and thats fine, I said, walking out.
I did feel a little bad about thishe was a decent teacher.A few weeks later, one of my classmates asked him if being a teacher was hard work. He told us how his family had come to the US from Mexico and how he worked at a lumber mill until he was in his late twenties.Then he decided to go to college and become a teacher.
This isnt work, our teacher told us.Im in an air-conditioned building, sipping coffee and reading books with you guys.
This was the first time Id learned that the word work has differ-ent meanings depending on ones perspective. I also learned that it was possible to go to college much later in life.It held the possibility that maybe, someday, I could go, too.
One thing I didnt like was that my friends were in different classes than me. The high school had a tracking policy, meaning kids were placed on different academic paths based on grades and test scores.The school placed me in geometry, while my friends were in high school math. I went to biology, and they went to general science. Kids made a distinction between the retard classes, and the prep classes. My school registration forms had a little p next to each class, indicating that they were preparatory courses. By default, kids called the other classes the retard ones. I was placed into my classes on the strength of my grades and scores in middle schoolback before Shelly had been shot, when Id been performing well.
When Mom and Shelly saw this, they were pleased. They thought this meant I was succeeding. But gradually, my grades deteriorated. I was in the strange position of sharing classes with kids who got straight-As and were college-bound when I was not. I was doing just enough to stay afloat because I thought if I failed anything, the school wouldnt let me graduate. Later, I discovered that if Id done just a little worse, they would have moved me into the retard classes. Getting C-minuses kept me from being where I wanted to bein the classes with my friends. There were pe-riods when I considered whether it was even worth it to remain in school. But some part of me enjoyed learning, though I would not have acknowledged it. I definitely enjoyed being around my friendsin some ways I felt closer to them than my own family, not uncommon for teenagers. In fact, if they had all gotten kicked out of school, I suspect I would have tried to do so as well, simply so I could be around them more.
At first, it was isolating to be in the prep classes as someone who was not part of any of these kids social groups. Over time, I got along well enough that I made friends with some of them. I found my place as a class clown.
Once, in English, a kid asked our teacher about the difference between hung and hanged and I announced,Hung is when you have a huge cock! while unfolding my arm and dropping it down on the desk.You know where to go, the teacher said, point-ing in the direction of the principal. In one English class, there was a really smart kid named Hugo I got along with. His parents were from Mexico and had a lot of money. At least, that was the impres-sion I got because Hugo always wore nice clothes and his parents were paying for his older brother to go to college. Wed visit the high school weight room together after school to work out and talk about class readings and girls and sports.
Hugo was a better influence on me than I was on him. We later had another class together. One day our teacher bent down over his desk to grab something, but then dropped the object and had to bend even farther. I handed Hugo a rubber band and dared him to hit the teachers ass with it. Hugo grabbed it, took aim, and snapped it right on target. Our teacher immediately jumped up and saw that the entire row of students, including me, had buried our heads in our arms trying to stifle our laughter. He demanded to know who did it. Nobody said a word, so he sent the entire row of eight students to the principals office. The principal individually spoke with each of us. He said that if we didnt tell him who had snapped the rubber band, then he would suspend all of us. But if we told him the truth, he would spare us.A real-life prisoners dilemma. Hugo and I were relieved when no one ratted us out, and no one was suspended.
Id somehow gotten through my biology class with a B-minus, and was subsequently placed into chemistry for my sophomore year. Chemistry was tough, even tougher than the advanced English class Id taken. I neglected my assignments and slept through class.When my teacher, Mr. Nichols, handed out our first progress reports, I saw that, for the first time, I was actually failing a class. To pass, Id have to put forth some actual effort. Id have to study for the tests and commit to doing the assignments in a structured way, not just haphazardly.No way, I thought.Not happening.
My teacher Mr. Nichols said he would never travel farther south than Chico, which I found strange. I asked him why, and he replied that this part of California was safe and cohesive and sug-gested that bigger cities were dangerous. I was skeptical, because the
Red Bluff I knew did not seem that safe. Later, I learned that Red Bluff is one of the most dangerous cities in California.
Tyler was a little older than the rest of us and the first to get his drivers license.At sixteen, he could already grow a full beard. Meanwhile, me and the other guys were shaving even when we didnt have to.
It was Thursday, and I was out in the school parking lot with Tyler next to the car his uncle loaned him. He leaned over to me and quietly said,I want a three-day weekend.
What are you talking about? I asked.
He pulled out a small chain from his car and wrapped it around his knuckles. He walked over to another kid a few parking spaces down who was leaning against his car with a couple of his friends.
The kid saw Tyler and me and spread his arms out.Whats up, man? You and your boyfriend got a problem?
Tyler walked right up to this kid and punched him on the side of the head. The kid crumpled to the ground.A small crowd formed around us.A few kids started yelling,Fight! Fight! but when they saw what had happened, they stopped.
The kid tried to get up and fell down again, rubbing his ear. Blood was dripping out. Id never seen anybody bleed from their ear before. I didnt even feel bad for the kid. Tyler was my friend, and all I thought was that he threw a solid punch. Some girls alerted a teacher nearby, who contacted the school nurse. Tyler didnt secure his three-day weekend. He got a full weeks suspension instead.
During the week Tyler was suspended, he invited me to break into an office building with him. I brought Edgar and his brother Enrique, and we all met up in the middle of the night. Tyler grabbed a brick and broke one of the windows. We climbed into the build-ing and began to destroy it. I saw a fire extinguisher in a glass case fixed to the wall. I broke the glass, grabbed the nozzle, and sprayed everywhere. Edgar took it from me and sprayed some more. We breathed in the chemicals, which tasted like salt. Enrique threw chairs and vases across the room. Tyler took a few swigs of vodka and then shattered the bottle on the floor. I thought about the fire extinguisher cabinet, In case of emergency, break glass.
I filled out applications for Taco Bell, Grocery Outlet, and a few other places. Then every week I visited each business, like Cristian suggested, asking if theyd had a chance to look at my application. Eventually, I landed a job at a local Italian restaurant as a busboy and dishwasher.This job sucked about as much as you would expect. Still, it was better than all the manual-labor jobs Id done before because it was indoors.
And I liked my coworkers. Most were in their early twenties, some in their thirties. My manager, Jim, was a small guy with a mustache who was in his forties. During my interview with him, he explained that he had been in prison but that the owner of the restaurant thought he deserved a second chance and hired him to manage the restaurant. Jim was very loyal to the owner because of this. He worked harder than anyone Id ever met to ensure that the restaurant operated smoothly.
Jims commitment rubbed off on me. I approached tables after guests left, collected dirty dishes, and wiped the tables and seats down. It was simple, mindless work, but it was surprisingly difficult to keep up on busy nights. Only one dishwasher was ever on shift and sometimes wed have sixty patrons dining in on a Friday night. I had a cart with large rubber containers Id bring out to the tables and devised a system for placing each type of dish (plates, pizza pans, etc.) in each rubber container to minimize the number of trips Id have to make. I remembered in the book Down and Out in Paris and London, George Orwell said working as a cook in a busy restaurant was like racing to sort a deck of cards against the clockthe task is easy, but the time constraints make it hard. Being a dishwasher and busboy was no different.
When work slowed down, Id daydream about the future. Id see patrons who were rich, meaning they drove a car less than five years old, and think how someday Id drive a nice car like them, too. Maybe I would also have a big house.Actually no, I didnt care much about living in a big house, but I knew Mom and Shelly would like that. So, Id buy one for them, and I would just have a place big enough to fit some weights and other gym equipment, with a garage for my car. How I planned on making all this money, I had no idea. But I liked thinking about it.That was where my mind was: the immediate present or the distant future without a bridge in between, but never the past. I didnt like thinking about the past.
On breaks, all my conversations with coworkers eventually turned to the topic of money, or lack of it. We would fantasize about what we would do if we suddenly struck it rich (a few coworkers played the lottery): vacations, cars, a house by the beach. I was making minimum wage, which was then $6.75 an hour. Jim and the owner noticed how efficiently I worked and gave me three raises within the first two months. I was earning more than some of the pizza makers.
Even though the job wasnt the best, I liked that it gave me a reason to not be at home. Mom and Shelly hadnt been getting along, and I could sense the negativity in the house. I volunteered for every extra shift and worked on both Saturdays and Sundays. I liked that I was making my own money, and I especially liked getting tips.When Id bus the tables, Id collect the tips left by patrons and stuff them into my apron. Then, at the end of the shift, Id pull out these dollar bills from my apron, soaking wet from an evening of washing dishes, and split them with my coworkers.
With this job, I was able to pay for drivers-ed classes to get my license.And beyond that, I still had my sights set on a car.
Between school, the job, and screwing around with my friends, I felt like I never had enough time, and something had to be sacrificed. I chose school.
Which meant I needed to get out of this stupid chemistry class.
At lunch with my friend John, I asked him,Dude, what class are you taking for a science credit this semester?
Its called like nutritional science or something. Its easy as fuck, he said.
Is there homework? What do you guys actually do?
We copy definitions of words from the textbook.We sometimes have to answer some questions at the end of the chapters. Then on Fridays we get to cook, he said. Last week we made some pasta thing.
This was blowing my mind.You are literally copying words from a book and cooking.Thats the class? I raised my eyebrows.
Yeah, he said, laughing. Its stupid. I have an A, and I dont do shit.
I visited my high school advisors office and explained that I wanted to switch out of chemistry. He tried to talk me out of it, saying that it would throw me off my academic trajectory. I told him that was fine, and he gave me a form.
I was also reading a lot of books during this time, and I was drawn mostly to memoirs by people who had lived tough lives. I read Black Boy by Richard Wright, This Boys Life by Tobias Wolff, and Daughter of Joy, about a Chinese woman who worked as a pros-titute in San Francisco during the Gold Rush. I found these books in the school library, which Id browse alone before or after school. Whenever I felt down, it was soothing to read about others who had experienced hardship and found ways to rise above it. It seemed like whenever something good happened in my life, something bad was right around the corner. Then Id read a few pages of a book, and Id remember I was not alone. If, instead, Id read stories (or scrolled images) of people living wonderful lives without any setbacks, it might have just led me to feel sorry for myself.
As far as I knew, I was the only one among my friends who regularly read books on my own. Although I didnt exactly hide my reading habit, I didnt advertise it either. I didnt want anyone to accuse me of being smart, because that would mean I would have to acknowledge that I wasnt living up to my potential. I wanted to keep expectations low, both from others and from myself.
More than a year after her injury, Shelly had mostly recuperated and regained use of her legs. Not completely, thoughshe would have to use a walking stick sometimes, and a wheelchair for long distances.
Seeing how she carried herself with determination throughout her recovery was both painful and moving. I saw how devoted Mom was to Shelly as she helped her. Even though they would argue and yell, they unfailingly tried to reassure Hannah and me that everything would be okay. I rarely believed them, but I wanted to. I loved them for saying it.
At last, Shelly had received a large insurance settlement from the shooting. She and Mom never mentioned the specific amount. I figured it was a few hundred thousand dollars, given what they bought: a new truck for Shelly, a Ford Mustang for Mom, and a motorboat they kept docked at a marina at Shasta Lake. In Red Bluff, having a new boat and a new Ford Mustang was really something. Mom let me drive it as practice for my drivers-ed classes. Out of the corner of my eye, I could see how nervous she was during our practice sessions. I tried to be as careful as possible, hoping that after I got my license, she would let me drive it by myself.
For Christmas, Mom and Shelly gave Hannah and me wrapped gifts that turned out to be prepaid Motorola cell phones. These types of phones had become common around this time in 2005 among my classmates and friends. Months earlier, Id asked Mom and Shelly about getting one. As I opened the box, they explained that I would be responsible for any fees to load minutes onto my phone, and that it would cost ten cents to send and receive text messages. I nodded and glanced at the wheelchair in the corner of the living room that Shelly sometimes had to use. Yeah, we had this financial windfall, money was no longer a problem, and we had these neat trinkets. But the cost was the total emotional upheaval of the family. I looked down at my new phone, happy that I had it and wishing I didnt.
Mom and Shelly also bought three houses in Red Bluff. One was for us to move into and two were investments to flip. They had agreed that the family should move into another home as a way to start over. But they strongly disagreed about what to do with the rest of the insurance settlement.
Shelly was more of a risk takershe enjoyed visiting casinos, and whenever we played Monopoly during bored game nights, she always tried to buy up as much property as she could. Shelly was adamant that they should invest in real estate, but Mom was more cautious and thought they should put the money into savings. Shelly explained to Mom how safe the real estate market was and how they could easily double or triple their initial investment. Mom was skeptical but had heard that many Californians were striking it rich by buying up houses. The new gold rush.
Our new home was by far the nicest Id ever lived init was a two-story house, which Id always associated with rich people. It had a spacious kitchen, a laundry room bigger than any bedroom Id ever had before, and bathrooms both upstairs and downstairs. The house also had an in-ground swimming pool in the backyard. Some of my classmates from school had above ground pools, but everybody knew that wasnt the same as having a real pool. When I first entered the backyard, I gazed at the crystal-clear blue water. I inhaled the chlorine smell and my mind flashed back to when I nearly drowned at the Martnez house all those years ago, but then I stopped myselfI didnt want to dwell on those memories for too long. Instead, I thought of how great it would be to have a pool party here with my friends.
Mom and Shelly expected to make a lot of money by selling the other two homes theyd bought.These houses required some upkeep, and I wanted to help out, so Id stop by both homes every week to rake the leaves and mow the lawns. Shelly explained that both houses would likely be sold within two or three months at the most, and I didnt mind doing the extra work for that amount of time.
But three months passed, and there were no buyers.
Mom was livid.
Tell me how you got these,she said. She was holding a pack of Marlboro Reds.
I found them on the ground on the way home from school, I replied. I wasnt going to tell her where I really got them.
Earlier that day I had been hanging out by my locker with my friend Edgar.
Yo, dude, he said.Thats the fucking vice principal over there. Hes coming right towards us. Can you put these in your locker or what, man? Edgar was holding two gym bags filled with weed, pills, cigarettes, and God knows what else. He was sweating bullets, paranoid that people could sense that he was carrying contraband. But his flop sweat and darting eyes werent just nerves. He looked high on something.
Yeah, man, whatever, I said. I took his bags and put them in my locker. They were heavier than I expected. I was about to ask what was in them but stopped myself. Instead, I asked,Why do you have all this shit anyway?
Its for my brother Enrique.They need him to deliver it, Edgar replied. Enrique had been trying to join a gang.
I didnt feel great about having this in my locker, but figured if I needed a contact for any of this stuff later, I could hit these guys up. Maybe Id get a discount or get something for free since I was doing a favor here for Enrique and Edgar. Later that day I met up with Enrique to give him the bags. He said thanks and stuffed a pack of Marlboros into the side of my backpack.
After school I went to work. On my break, I went outside to join my coworkers for a smoke.They knew I was underage, but nobody cared. Sometimes one of the pizza makers bought my friends and me booze and didnt even charge us extra.That same guy asked if he could get a smoke, and I told him where my backpack was.
After work, I walked home. When I stepped into the house, Mom immediately saw the pack of cigarettes sticking out of my backpack pocket. My coworker must not have pushed the pack all the way down, and I hadnt bothered to check.
We argued for a while. Mom and Shelly told me how stupid I was to be smoking. I tried to explain that it wasnt that big of a deal, but I understood why they were upset.
Look, I know smoking is bad, I said. I know a lot of stuff is bad. I just dont care.
They grounded me and took my phone. Ill have to be more careful, I thought. I couldnt hang out with my friends while I was grounded, so in the meantime, I asked for more hours at work.
In addition to grounding me, Mom and Shelly enlisted me to help spruce up the houses more because they still didnt have any potential buyers.
The next day, we visited Target to get house paint and other supplies. Id been quiet for most of the afternoon, trying not to say anything else that might get me into more trouble. The night before, I was listening to the radio show Loveline, and one of the cohosts, Dr. Drew Pinsky, explained that statistically, each time a person gets pulled over by a police officer for drinking and driving, there are at least eighty other instances that the person decided to drink and drive but didnt get caught. I thought about how many times Id done something that would infuriate Mom and Shelly, and yet this incident with the cigarettes was one of the few times Id gotten caught. I wondered what they would think if they really knew what Id been up to and felt glad to have been caught only for this relatively minor infraction.
While we were at Target, Shelly had been having back pain and decided to use one of the stores electric wheelchairs.
I was looking at some clothes, about twenty yards away from Shelly, when I saw her sitting in her wheelchair, leaning over to touch a bookshelf. As Shelly pressed forward on the shelf, we realized it was actually two shelves, one stacked on top of the other.The top shelf fell over. Suddenly, I heard a loud thud! as the shelf toppled and a corner slammed into Shellys head. Shelly jumped up from her chair. Mom ran toward her to see if she was okay.
She wasnt. Blood began to spurt from her scalp like a sprinkler. Droplets spread around the stores glossy flooring. People around us stared, unsure what to do. Mom was frozen, shocked at what was happening. My sister had a hand over her mouth, and I could tell she was scared. I was scared. I looked around and grabbed some nearby towels off a rack and ran over to hand them to Mom. She held them against Shellys head. The white towels quickly turned to red while store employees rushed to call an ambulance.
We waited at the emergency room while the doctors examined Shelly. Mom and Hannah were silent, but I was pretty sure they were thinking what I was: What the fuck just happened and why would something so awful happen to Shelly so soon after she had been shot? It felt, for me, like further evidence that the world was fundamentally unstable, and that giving any thought to my future was senseless. Mom was strangely silent, and I was surprised that she made no mention of prayer or God. I tried and failed to stop thinking about that blood spraying everywhere. I couldnt get that horrifying image out of my mind.
A few minutes later, Mom said that she wished shed had a camera to take photos of what had happened for insurance purposes.
Mom, your phone has a camera, my sister said, pointing at Moms flip phone.
Oh, youre right, Mom said. The pictures come out all blurry though.
The doctors gave Shelly a few staples in her scalp, an ice pack, and some painkillers, and told us she would be fine. Apparently, minor head injuries can cause a lot of bleeding, and can appear more serious than they really are.
For my friends and me, it seemed like half our waking hours were spent trying to find booze or weed or God knows what else. For the girls we knew, their mission to get drunk or high was seldom as hard to accomplish. There was no shortage of predatory twenty-three-year-old guys on motorcycles who were more than happy to supply drugs and alcohol to a fifteen-year-old girl.
For groups of girls aimlessly walking around,fun would find them in the form of a guy who had graduated high school five years earlier and rode a beat-up dirt bike. At the time, that made sense to me. If some twenty-three-year-old woman had pulled up to my friends and me and offered us some booze to come chill with her, we would have leapt at the opportunity. But that doesnt happen for boys. We had to go out ourselves and find the fun. It was an endless quest, and our conversations went something like:
What about Seans cousin? Hes twenty-one. Maybe hell hook us up?
Nah, every time we give him cash to buy us beer, he takes like half the case for himself. Fucker is a thief.
What about the guy from Cristians work? We bought weed from him in the parking lot before.
Nah, hes on probation or something. Too sketched out to sell to minors right now.
What if we just waited by Circle K and offered to give some-one money to buy for us?
Dude, Ive heard that cops go undercover and try to bust kids for buying booze like that all the time. My aunt calls it entrapment.
Rob, what about your neighbor Julius? Hes hooked us up before.
He got his stuff from his stepdad, but they got into a fight. Last time I saw him, his arms were all cut up and shit. He told me his stepdad threw him through a glass door.
Well, shit.
Months later, I walked home from work and saw an unfamiliar car parked in front of my house.
I still detested the sight of strange vehicles in the drivewayholdover feelings from my experiences in foster care, when an unknown car often signaled a surprise visit by a social worker coming to take me to another home.
The car was a 1992 Ford Escort. Mom was washing it.
Whats this? I asked. Dont tell me youre planning to trade in the Mustang for this clunker.
Careful, Mom said. Dont let Shelly hear you say that.
Okay, why are you washing this car? I asked.
I was hoping it would be ready when you got here, Mom said. I realized then that the car was for me. Thrilled, I thanked Mom and walked inside the house to thank Shelly. They explained that theyd negotiated a good price for the car, and that Id have to pay for the insurance, the gas, any repairs it might need, and so on.
This was a given; it had never crossed my mind to ask them for financial help with car expenses. Id saved up most of my earnings over the last few months at my job.
As soon as Mom handed me the keys, I went to pick up Tyler and John, and we took a long ride. Both of them were already driving by this point so it wasnt that big a deal to them. But for me it was the freest Id felt in a long time.
Tyler, sitting in the passengers seat, pulled out a plastic squeeze bottle from his backpack.
What is that? I asked.
Vodka, he said. Dont worry, guys, I brought enough for the class. He took a swig, twisted the cap back on, and handed it to me.
No fucking way, dude.I literally just got this car,I said,snatching the bottle and tossing it into the backseat with John. Keep this back there.
I thanked Mom and Shelly again for the car when I got home that night, and they reminded me to be careful when driving. Hannah announced she would be old enough to get her license in a few years, and asked if she could practice driving my car.
Yeah, whenever you want, I replied, tossing her the keys. Mom glared at us.Absolutely not, she said.Give me those keys now.
Theyre joking, Shelly said.
Mom rolled her eyes, and we all laughed. Shelly cooked, and during family dinner we sat around the table, and I told them how much I liked my car. Even though the mood was pleasant, Mom still looked worried. I reassured her that of course I wouldnt let Hannah take my car out, but her expression remained unchanged.
I would lie awake in bed at night for months, because I knew this day would come, Mom said.
We were sitting in the living room of the biggest house I had ever lived in, and I learned that it had been a temporary dream.
Eight months had passed, and the two houses Mom and Shelly had intended to flip had still not sold. Shelly and Mom had run out of money. The year 2005 was the right time to invest in houses in California, they said. But not 2006. They explained that all our homes were being foreclosed, and that we had to leave Red Bluff.
Please write a short review/reaction andpost it here on this form. Or, if you prefer, you can also email me your review (rob@robkhenderson.com).
Please write a short review/reaction and
. Or, if you prefer, you can also email me your review (rob@robkhenderson.com).
Comments
Restacks
Dr. Paul
Dr. Paul
Dr. Paul
Dr. Paul
Dr. Paul
Nov 28, 2023
So many bits of memory that more men than you can imagine share but never speak of. Again its enough to bring any man privately to tears.
So many bits of memory that more men than you can imagine share but never speak of. Again its enough to bring any man privately to tears.
Like (3)
Reply
Share
Dan SG
Dan SG
Nov 28, 2023
Besides the scientific articles, that I really enjoy, this is a treasure to be discovered. After reading this preview I just realized what a loss could have been if the Rob did not meet his full potential. I per-ordered the book and it is going to be a great achievement when published.
Besides the scientific articles, that I really enjoy, this is a treasure to be discovered. After reading this preview I just realized what a loss could have been if the Rob did not meet his full potential. I per-ordered the book and it is going to be a great achievement when published.
Like (3)
Reply
Share
Top
Latest
Discussions

Rob Henderson

Rob Henderson

Rob Henderson

Rob Henderson

Rob Henderson

Rob Henderson

Rob Henderson

Rob Henderson

Rob Henderson

Rob Henderson


undefined subscriptions will be displayed on your profile (edit)
Skip for now
For your security, we need to re-authenticate you.
Click the link we sent to sasha.p.podolsky@gmail.com, orclick here to sign in.