

1
Book meeting
Book a meeting
You can now watch my recent appearance on the TRIGGERnometry podcast where I spoke with Konstantin Kisin and Francis Foster:
Subscribed
Share
Share
Give a gift subscription
Give a gift subscription
Links forSpotifyandApple Podcast.
Links for
and
.
You can check out my 2022 appearance on the showhere.
You can check out my 2022 appearance on the show
.
You are invited to see me speak at the Buckley Institute at Yale University this Thursday (April 11) at 4:30pm. Its free and open to the public.Details and info here.Id love to see as many readers there as possible.
You are invited to see me speak at the Buckley Institute at Yale University this Thursday (April 11) at 4:30pm. Its free and open to the public.
Id love to see as many readers there as possible.
Keep Your Head Up in Some Rooms, and Your Head Down in Others: Thoughts on friendship and association value.
Rob Henderson's Newsletter
Read more
Mary Wakefield recentlyinterviewed meforThe Spectator:
Mary Wakefield recently
for
:
Opposite me now in a caf in Cambridge is a man who might have answers. Rob Henderson grew up in institutions and foster homes in California  I think it was like 16 different houses in total. He escaped the usual fate of kids in care via the air force and university and now, at 33, he has written a book, Troubled, about his life and his thoughts. Troubled does not reflect very well on human nature.Somehow expressing concern for disadvantaged kids became coded as conservative or right-wingHenderson says: I think somehow expressing concern for disadvantaged kids became coded as conservative or right-wing. Theres this meme of Oh wont someone think of the children and it became a kind of punchline and it became associated with finger-wagging church ladies. The last thing an educated member of the cultural elite wants to be is thought of as the sort of narrow-minded church lady. Its just so much more fashionable to talk about climate.Henderson is dapper, contained, clear-thinking. Hes half-Korean and, hes recently discovered, half-Mexican. To look at him, youd never guess the utter chaos of his early life.[]Henderson pauses, then adds: I know a lot of people right now are focusing on social media and smartphones and devices to explain why kids are unhappy, but I wonder if I mean were now two to three generations into unmarried parenting and divorce being relatively normalised, if that might not have an effect, especially for less educated, lower-income people Now youre seeing Zoomers in their twenties who were raised by a single parent who was raised by a single parent. They have no model at all of what a stable family looks like and theyre passing on a lot of that feeling of instability.[]I think the reason is, people are naturally drawn to exhibitions and demonstrations of strength, so when they see people marching and chanting at movements to change climate policy, for instance, they are drawn to that united force, he says. So its precisely because they have no power and no visibility that middle-class luxury believers dont fancy championing kids? Im not confident about this, but I think people are almost repelled by the weakness of children. Kids cant vote, they dont unite and rally and agitate in favour of their own interests. They cant say Hey, pay attention, we are being harmed.
Opposite me now in a caf in Cambridge is a man who might have answers. Rob Henderson grew up in institutions and foster homes in California  I think it was like 16 different houses in total. He escaped the usual fate of kids in care via the air force and university and now, at 33, he has written a book, Troubled, about his life and his thoughts. Troubled does not reflect very well on human nature.
Somehow expressing concern for disadvantaged kids became coded as conservative or right-wing
Henderson says: I think somehow expressing concern for disadvantaged kids became coded as conservative or right-wing. Theres this meme of Oh wont someone think of the children and it became a kind of punchline and it became associated with finger-wagging church ladies. The last thing an educated member of the cultural elite wants to be is thought of as the sort of narrow-minded church lady. Its just so much more fashionable to talk about climate.
Henderson is dapper, contained, clear-thinking. Hes half-Korean and, hes recently discovered, half-Mexican. To look at him, youd never guess the utter chaos of his early life.
[]
Henderson pauses, then adds: I know a lot of people right now are focusing on social media and smartphones and devices to explain why kids are unhappy, but I wonder if I mean were now two to three generations into unmarried parenting and divorce being relatively normalised, if that might not have an effect, especially for less educated, lower-income people Now youre seeing Zoomers in their twenties who were raised by a single parent who was raised by a single parent. They have no model at all of what a stable family looks like and theyre passing on a lot of that feeling of instability.
[]
I think the reason is, people are naturally drawn to exhibitions and demonstrations of strength, so when they see people marching and chanting at movements to change climate policy, for instance, they are drawn to that united force, he says. So its precisely because they have no power and no visibility that middle-class luxury believers dont fancy championing kids? Im not confident about this, but I think people are almost repelled by the weakness of children. Kids cant vote, they dont unite and rally and agitate in favour of their own interests. They cant say Hey, pay attention, we are being harmed.
You can read the whole thinghere.
You can read the whole thing
.
You can't be too happy, literallyby Adam Mastroianni
by Adam Mastroianni
Love and Libertyby Scott Alexander
by Scott Alexander
What Happened When Oregon Decriminalized Hard Drugsby Jim Hinch
by Jim Hinch
Problems with Cross-Gender Eavesdroppingby Sympathetic Opposition
by Sympathetic Opposition
Academia Will Not Love You Backby John Halbrooks
by John Halbrooks
What the Sports Culture War is Aboutby Ethan Strauss
by Ethan Strauss
Troubled and Motorhome Prophecies: Finding Their Own Way Outby Alexandra Hudson (The Wall Street Journal)
by Alexandra Hudson (The Wall Street Journal)
Is Rob Henderson Troubled or Blessed?By Auguste Meyrat (Chronicles)
By Auguste Meyrat (Chronicles)
I received my PhD in 2022 but the author says Im completing my doctorate. He then suggests Ill run for public office, in addition to becoming a speaker, a therapist, and a promulgator of positive psychology. Near the end he says its obvious I need Jesus. Weird review here.
Andhere is a new Goodreads giveawaywhere you can enter to win a free print copy ofTroubled
And
where you can enter to win a free print copy of
1. Research has found that most men find most women at least somewhat sexually attractive, whereas most women do not find most men sexually attractive at all. (source:Why Women Have Sexby Cindy Meston and David Buss).
1. Research has found that most men find most women at least somewhat sexually attractive, whereas most women do not find most men sexually attractive at all. (
:
by Cindy Meston and David Buss).
2. Researchers asked 681 child participants (mean age: 10 years old) to look at photos of 2 people. The children were then instructed to choose who they preferred to be the captain of a ship. Unbeknownst to the participants, the 2 people were in fact politicians running for office. The childrens preferred person for captain won their political contest 71% of the time. (source). Interestingly, this study was conducted in May of 2008 and the children correctly predicted the outcome of the Obama-McCain election. Want to know whos going to win in November? Maybe ask your fifth grader.
2. Researchers asked 681 child participants (mean age: 10 years old) to look at photos of 2 people. The children were then instructed to choose who they preferred to be the captain of a ship. Unbeknownst to the participants, the 2 people were in fact politicians running for office. The childrens preferred person for captain won their political contest 71% of the time. (
). Interestingly, this study was conducted in May of 2008 and the children correctly predicted the outcome of the Obama-McCain election. Want to know whos going to win in November? Maybe ask your fifth grader.
3. Religiosity of American College Professors (source; note that this study was published in 2009):
3. Religiosity of American College Professors (
; note that this study was published in 2009):
Least religious ("I don't believe in God"):
Psychology: 50%
Mech Engineering: 44%
Biology: 28%
Poli Sci: 23%
Econ: 23%
Most religious ("I know God exists"):
Accounting: 63%
Elementary education: 57%
Finance: 49%
Marketing: 47%
Art: 45%
To receive new posts, accessmore than 100 premium archived posts, and support my work, consider becoming a free or paid subscriber.
Subscribed

Comments
Restacks
Top
Latest
Discussions

Rob Henderson

Rob Henderson

Rob Henderson

Rob Henderson

Rob Henderson

Rob Henderson

Rob Henderson

Rob Henderson

Rob Henderson

Rob Henderson


undefined subscriptions will be displayed on your profile (edit)
Skip for now
For your security, we need to re-authenticate you.
Click the link we sent to sasha.p.podolsky@gmail.com, orclick here to sign in.
Info
Shopping








0:00/1:10:10

0:00
/
1:10:10


