

1
Book meeting
Book a meeting
Recently, on his Modern Wisdom podcast, I told my friend Chris Williamson a story I sometimes get a little embarrassed about.1
Recently, on his Modern Wisdom podcast, I told my friend Chris Williamson a story I sometimes get a little embarrassed about.
1
Back when I was stationed at McChord Air Force Base when I was nineteen, some friends and I received permission to move off base. We found a rental house we liked. I learned that we had to pay the first months rent, last months rent, plus a security deposit. To secure the house, I had to drain my bank account. At this point, I was making around $1300 a month and had just purchased a beater car that was having some brake issues. This was 2009. I couldnt afford a ticket to see the first Avatar movie after depleting my account. I made up some excuse to my roommates about why I couldnt go to the movies with them. I had one belt from high school that I still wore, and it broke during this time. I couldnt afford to replace it, so I went the next two weeks without a belt until my next paycheck. At one point, looking into my closet and realizing I had a necktie and shiny black dress shoes but no belt, I couldnt help but laugh. The tie and shoes were issued to me by the military for my formal dress uniform, though. They dont supply normal belts for personal use and everyday wear.
Today, I have achieved the milestone of two belts.
Some of you remember the old days, back when I still hosted this newsletter on MailChimp.

I had that donorbox button up there, thinking maybe the occasional reader would send 5 or 10 bucks my way, and I could get a coffee on my way to class or take the occasional Uber instead of riding my bicycle to the train station. Instead, what happened was that within a matter of months, readers were collectively sending me something like $1,000 a month. Then I started to worry that this newsletter wouldnt live up to peoples expectations. Those worries fell by the wayside when it became a way for me to procrastinate from the main tasks I had at that point in 2020-2021, which were running studies for my psychology PhD thesis and working on my book manuscript.
Piers Steel, author ofThe Procrastination Equation, has written, My best trick is to play my projects off against each other, procrastinating on one by working on another.
Piers Steel, author of
, has written, My best trick is to play my projects off against each other, procrastinating on one by working on another.
Many people faced with an important task will suddenly find themselves responding to emails or making plans for an unrelated project. Writers or aspiring writers sometimes get caught in the trap of thinking they need to do more research, when research is often just a way of feeling productive while avoiding the main task of writing.
The philosopher John Perry has suggested that We are willing to pursue any vile task as long as it allows us to avoid something worse.
For me, running that MailChimp newsletter as a side hustle was not at all unpleasant. I enjoyed procrastinating to write my weekly posts. I was perplexed when it started to generate a profit. I still had the working-class mindset that only things that were burdensome could lead to real money.
Seeing the generosity of readers sending donations was when I knew writing was a viable option for me to make a living outside of the legacy institutions of academia and journalism.
You, my readers, came through for me at the right time. I know it sounds cheesy. Its just a fact, though, and Im thankful for it. Its one of several reasons I was able to secure a deal to writeTroubled. Major publishers are well aware that not every book will be a hit. But they are often more willing to incur a financial cost if they can change the conversation or promote a particular political agenda. The rumors Im hearing now are that more and more staff are simply unwilling to publish an unknown author if he or she isnt on board with the prevailing elite dogma or doesnt tick the right identity boxes. More and more, the stars have to align for an unknown first time non-progressive author to get a deal unless if he or she already has a decent-sized readership.
You, my readers, came through for me at the right time. I know it sounds cheesy. Its just a fact, though, and Im thankful for it. Its one of several reasons I was able to secure a deal to write
. Major publishers are well aware that not every book will be a hit. But they are often more willing to incur a financial cost if they can change the conversation or promote a particular political agenda. The rumors Im hearing now are that more and more staff are simply unwilling to publish an unknown author if he or she isnt on board with the prevailing elite dogma or doesnt tick the right identity boxes. More and more, the stars have to align for an unknown first time non-progressive author to get a deal unless if he or she already has a decent-sized readership.
At 29 bucks, the price of ahardcoverofTroubledis equivalent to about 3-4 months of a paid subscription plan to my Substack. Ill just say it: My book delivers more insights, value, and entertainment than 3 or 4 months worth of my Substack posts. Which makes sense. I spent nearly 4 years in total writing it.
At 29 bucks, the price of a
of
is equivalent to about 3-4 months of a paid subscription plan to my Substack. Ill just say it: My book delivers more insights, value, and entertainment than 3 or 4 months worth of my Substack posts. Which makes sense. I spent nearly 4 years in total writing it.
My book demanded at least 10X more time, mental effort, concentration, and preparation to write than 3-4 months worth of Substack posts. But the price is the same. If writers were paid by effort, my book should cost something like $300. Thankfully, though, thats not how things work. (As an avid book reader I am very glad this is not the case).
29 bucks for 4 years of work is a bargain. What will you find?
My experiences living in 10 different foster families in Los Angeles and Red Bluff, California
What its like to drink beer as a 5 year old
Why childhood instability is worse than childhood poverty
Thoughts on why 60% of boys in foster care are later incarcerated, and only 3% graduate from college
7 fist fights
How I broke my finger after punching my classmate 3 times in the face
Thoughts on the differences between delinquent teenage boys vs. delinquent girls
Some casual racism, homophobia, and slurs I hope dont get me cancelled
My thoughts on destiny, determinism, nature/nurture, and free will
What it's like to chug tequila, pop pills, and smoke weed and Marlboro Reds as a 9 year old (This caused a lot of stomachaches in my quest to look cool to my friends)
Driving and shooting paintball guns at pedestrians
Setting my friends house on fire
Vandalizing buildings and learning that fire extinguisher chemicals taste like salt
What its like to get drunk and beat up a fat guy on the side of a highway
My best friends hot older sister teaching me how to play the choking game
My favorite books from childhood and adolescence
What I learned from reading Bruce Lee and Dwayne The Rock Johnsons autobiography in 8th grade
How I reacted when I learned that one of my moms was shot
Getting jumped and then repeatedly kicked in the face by 4 guys
My reaction in high school upon learning that one of my friends was shot to death
What military training in the Air Force was like at the height of the War on Terror
How I ended up in rehab and my experiences with the other patients and the counselors while in treatment
How standardized testing gave me a second chance in life, and why its a mistake for colleges to ditch the SAT
How the people who wield the most influence in society only pay lip service to the challenges of inequality
Thoughts on how class is portrayed in The Sopranos, Roseanne, Breaking Bad, and The West Wing
What it was like to attend Yale in 2015 and witness the birth of wokeness and cancel culture
My fullest exposition yet on the luxury beliefs framework
Commentary and analysis of the relentless striving for social status among Americas future ruling class
The deceitful tactics Ivy League students use to get prestigious internships
Why upper middle class college graduates propagate the absurd myth of white privilege
My interactions with high profile professors including Harold Bloom, Albert Bandura, and John Gaddis
Why elite universities encourage their students to nurture their grievances
What I learned when I met Jonathan Haidt for the first time
My revulsion when seeing rich Yale students would use words like danger and pain and harm to describe their experiences studying at one of the richest universities in the world
Why it was considered shameful to be perceived as rich at a rich university full of rich students
My explanation of the Hamilton musical phenomenon and what it reveals about the dynamics of social status
Reflections on the orphan protagonist archetype (Oliver Twist, Harry Potter, Cinderella, Rapunzel, Bruce Wayne, etc.) in stories what it reveals about human nature
Most of my book is completely new material. Stuff Ive never shared on this newsletter or anywhere else. The aim is for my book to serve as a critical rejoinder to prevailing elite narratives around poverty, upward mobility, family, and social class.
After sharing early drafts of the manuscript with different people, Ive noticed that, perhaps unsurprisingly, men like the preface and final 3 chapters, which contain lots of research findings and survey data and my own psychological and sociological observations and commentary about social mobility, class, and status. Women seem to prefer the main personal narrative portions, where I describe how a boy in the squalor of the Los Angeles foster care system makes his way to the U.S. Air Force, Yale, and Cambridge, and the lessons and insights I picked up along the way. All of the physical violence, emotional setbacks, professional triumphs, and personal failures Ive experienced throughout my unusual life.
Sometimes I read or listen to stories about the lives of Italian or Jewish immigrants in the early twentieth century or about some of my favorite rappers as a kid like 50 Cent or North Korean refugees like Yeonmi Park. And then I think, I didnt experience that much adversity. Sometimes, though, some readers will tell me I did. On some days, I agree with them; other days, not as much. Trying to resolve the ambivalence. I think the difference is peopleexpectimmigrants to have had tough lives 100 years ago, and hold the same expectation for guys who become famous rappers and same for survivors of totalitarian regimes. Expectations match the reality. You dont really expect the modern foster care system, though, to be quite so bleak. You dont expect working class neighborhoods (like the one I was adopted into) to be in such a severe state of disrepair. Theres just a large gap between expectations and reality here that makes it different from other stories of adversity.
Sometimes I read or listen to stories about the lives of Italian or Jewish immigrants in the early twentieth century or about some of my favorite rappers as a kid like 50 Cent or North Korean refugees like Yeonmi Park. And then I think, I didnt experience that much adversity. Sometimes, though, some readers will tell me I did. On some days, I agree with them; other days, not as much. Trying to resolve the ambivalence. I think the difference is people
immigrants to have had tough lives 100 years ago, and hold the same expectation for guys who become famous rappers and same for survivors of totalitarian regimes. Expectations match the reality. You dont really expect the modern foster care system, though, to be quite so bleak. You dont expect working class neighborhoods (like the one I was adopted into) to be in such a severe state of disrepair. Theres just a large gap between expectations and reality here that makes it different from other stories of adversity.
By pre-ordering, you can help get this book on a best seller list, which increases the likelihood that it will capture the attention and interest of the people who shape culture and policy. Especially people who graduate from elite universities and are overrepresented in influential industries like media, academia, Hollywood, government, or the nonprofit sector. These segments of the haute bourgeoisie, for better or worse, play a large role in what our culture wants people to aspire to. They have a massively disproportionate sway on the story our society tells itself and the challenges we should be concentrating on. I have no illusions that the release of this book will be some transformative landmark event. But if enough people buy and read it, then we can move the needle of our culture in a slightly more positive direction.
More brief comments on preorders.
Theres a good chance that if youve ever followed an author on social media (I have, and I now understand why they are so obnoxious), you've heard them say PLEASE PRE-ORDER MY BOOK.
It is perfectly reasonable for a sane person to ask, Why? Why the f*** does it matter if I order your book in advance. The book doesnt even arrive until the publication date.
Heres what Ive learned.
The reason pre-orders are important is that in the months before a book launches, bookstores and retailers add up their pre-orders and use that information to decide how many copies of the book they want to order and stock in their stores. Will they order 500, 1000, 10,000? This, of course, also affects how many copies publishers print in their initial run.
Pre-orders also help to determine whether a bookstore places the book in a prime location, which in turn affects how well it sells.
Another thing Ive learned: Pre-orders count towards the book's first week of sales.
So if you get 1,000 pre-orders, and then sell 1,000 books the first week, you have sold 2,000 copies your first week. This increases the odds of making a bestseller list. This is important for future sales, because a book with the bestseller label is more likely to appeal to future buyers, and is also more likely to catch the attention of tastemakers and people who shape culture and policy. Bestsellers are also more likely to be promoted by the publisher and placed in prime locations at bookstores.
Even books that are detested but sell well will often get prime real estate in a store.
I recall a surreal moment a few years ago when I was still a grad student at Cambridge. After they invited Jordan Peterson to be a guest research fellow on campus, the universitys divinity school suddenly rescinded their decision after some squawking from his critics. I then walked over to one of the main bookstores in town and saw that an entire wall was covered with12 Rules for Life, because it was, at that point in early 2019, the number 1 book in the country, and probably the world. A vivid illustration of the increasingly widening chasm between elites and everyone else.
I recall a surreal moment a few years ago when I was still a grad student at Cambridge. After they invited Jordan Peterson to be a guest research fellow on campus, the universitys divinity school suddenly rescinded their decision after some squawking from his critics. I then walked over to one of the main bookstores in town and saw that an entire wall was covered with
, because it was, at that point in early 2019, the number 1 book in the country, and probably the world. A vivid illustration of the increasingly widening chasm between elites and everyone else.
To be clear, pre-orders usually dont make authors a ton of money. You could probably count on two hands the number of living authors who have struck it rich by writing books. But pre-orders and strong book sales increases the likelihood that an author could get another book deal in the future.
This is all to say: If youre sure you want to get my book, please dont wait.
The chattering class wont stop gushing about that polyamory ladys book, which is now being billed as an instant NYT bestseller. Her book got atonof attention and press fromlegacymedia outlets. My book has had some media coverage, but not nearly the same amount. The only real possible route I have available for my book to reach lots of people are independent channels like Substack and podcasts, with readers and supporters whose respect I have earned over the years. A friend tells me if my book gets on the list it will restore his flagging confidence in the educated book reading public. IfTroubleddoes well, it will count as proof that independent writers outside of legacy media can break into the broader discourse around books. Occasionally, an underdog like me can exceed expectations. Candidly, sales numbers look okay, but not quite bestseller level. If theres any chance of getting there, the power to do this lies with you. You aren't charged anything until the book actually ships, sopre-orderingessentially is an act of support.
The chattering class wont stop gushing about that polyamory ladys book, which is now being billed as an instant NYT bestseller. Her book got a
of attention and press from
media outlets. My book has had some media coverage, but not nearly the same amount. The only real possible route I have available for my book to reach lots of people are independent channels like Substack and podcasts, with readers and supporters whose respect I have earned over the years. A friend tells me if my book gets on the list it will restore his flagging confidence in the educated book reading public. If
does well, it will count as proof that independent writers outside of legacy media can break into the broader discourse around books. Occasionally, an underdog like me can exceed expectations. Candidly, sales numbers look okay, but not quite bestseller level. If theres any chance of getting there, the power to do this lies with you. You aren't charged anything until the book actually ships, so
essentially is an act of support.
Speaking with other authors and people in the publishing industry, theabsolute minimumnumber of sales needed to have any slim chance of getting on any bestseller list is two thousand. To have a stronger chance, most recommended five thousand. At the moment,Troubledhas sold around fifteen hundred hardcovers. Its tough to sell books. So, if you have the means,please pre-order a copy. For yourself. For a loved one or a friend as a gift. For someone you think might benefit from this book. Some readers have asked me if children can read my book. Naturally, it depends on a kids level of maturity and inquisitiveness. But, in my view, a curious and reflective twelve-year-old could handle it just fine. And if you cant afford a book, support your local library. If they dont have a copy, please request that they stock one. Finally, if none of those above options are available to you, just shoot me an email; we can work something out. I put a lot of effort into writing, and enjoy getting paid for my work. Money is nice. I know what its like to not have it. Still, spreading the critical message ofTroubledis more important to me than making a profit. Together, we can ensure that one memoir can get on a bestseller list despite not being authored by a Hollywood celeb or a well-off polyamory enthusiast. Together, we can get one memoir on the list that communicates the struggles of ordinary people2, that makes plain the dynamics underlying social class, that promotes the importance of family stability, and investigates the habits and views of hypocritical elites who pay lip service to improving society while remaining willfully blind to the realities of poor and working class communities.
Speaking with other authors and people in the publishing industry, the
number of sales needed to have any slim chance of getting on any bestseller list is two thousand. To have a stronger chance, most recommended five thousand. At the moment,
has sold around fifteen hundred hardcovers. Its tough to sell books. So, if you have the means,
. For yourself. For a loved one or a friend as a gift. For someone you think might benefit from this book. Some readers have asked me if children can read my book. Naturally, it depends on a kids level of maturity and inquisitiveness. But, in my view, a curious and reflective twelve-year-old could handle it just fine. And if you cant afford a book, support your local library. If they dont have a copy, please request that they stock one. Finally, if none of those above options are available to you, just shoot me an email; we can work something out. I put a lot of effort into writing, and enjoy getting paid for my work. Money is nice. I know what its like to not have it. Still, spreading the critical message of
is more important to me than making a profit. Together, we can ensure that one memoir can get on a bestseller list despite not being authored by a Hollywood celeb or a well-off polyamory enthusiast. Together, we can get one memoir on the list that communicates the struggles of ordinary people
2
, that makes plain the dynamics underlying social class, that promotes the importance of family stability, and investigates the habits and views of hypocritical elites who pay lip service to improving society while remaining willfully blind to the realities of poor and working class communities.
And if my book is successful, maybe Ill buy a third belt.
Troubledis out in two days. February 20.
is out in two days. February 20.
Preorder on Amazon (US)
Barnes & Noble
Bookshop
Amazon (UK)
Audible(I narrated the audiobook myself)
(I narrated the audiobook myself)
Links for other book venders here
Ive spent several months compiling this list of the most interesting and impactful books Ive ever read.
The list contains my mini-reviews summarizing each book and explaining its importance.
If you are interested in getting the list, just follow these two steps:
1. Pre-order a copy ofTroubled: A Memoir of Foster Care, Family, and Social Classin whatever format you want (print, ebook, or audiobook)
1. Pre-order a copy of
in whatever format you want (print, ebook, or audiobook)
2. Forward your receipt or proof of purchase to the email addresstroubledmemoir@gmail.com
2. Forward your receipt or proof of purchase to the email address

Already purchased a copy? Just send your receipt or take a picture of your book and send it to troubledmemoir@gmail.com and youll get the secret reading list right away.
That's it!
I appreciate you all. Thanks for your support. Thanks for reading.
Its to Chriss great credit as a conversationalist that I momentarily forgot we were being recorded and felt at ease enough to tell him that embarrassing story. The best podcast hosts are capable of bringing out offbeat and fresh stuff from their guests. The podcast where we speak about this will be out later this week, I think.
Nobody is going to give my friends from high school a book deal; and these guys arent the type to read let alone write a book (I was the only one in our friend group who read books). Im in the unique position of being able to communicate the experiences in deteriorating parts of the country in a language and manner that college-educated people might take seriously. It was important to me thatTroubledwasnt simply a conventional bootstraps story and so I delve into the outcomes of my friends in my adoptive hometown and where their lives ended up. In addition to my anomalous trajectory, I also describe the modal, expected outcome of a young guy who grows up in poverty and squalor in twenty-first century America in as much rich detail and specificity as I could. I was thankful to see that the author and male psychology expert Shawn T. Smith picked up on this in hisreviewwhen he noted that the people I describe are not easily categorized as heroes or villains. Books can, with enough support and interest, shift attention and conversations.
Nobody is going to give my friends from high school a book deal; and these guys arent the type to read let alone write a book (I was the only one in our friend group who read books). Im in the unique position of being able to communicate the experiences in deteriorating parts of the country in a language and manner that college-educated people might take seriously. It was important to me that
wasnt simply a conventional bootstraps story and so I delve into the outcomes of my friends in my adoptive hometown and where their lives ended up. In addition to my anomalous trajectory, I also describe the modal, expected outcome of a young guy who grows up in poverty and squalor in twenty-first century America in as much rich detail and specificity as I could. I was thankful to see that the author and male psychology expert Shawn T. Smith picked up on this in his
when he noted that the people I describe are not easily categorized as heroes or villains. Books can, with enough support and interest, shift attention and conversations.
Comments
Restacks
Jim the Geek
Jim the Geek
The Affable Curmudgeon
The Affable Curmudgeon
The Affable Curmudgeon
Feb 18, 2024
Edited
This is, without a doubt, one of the most compelling sales pitches I've ever experienced. I don't mean that in a derogatory sense, more in awe. I've pre-ordered the book, and converted from free to subscription. This, in spite of the fact that I already have so many subscriptions that keeping up is nearly a full-time job. At 76 I don't expect your book to change my life, but after I've read it I plan to pass it around to my 5 grandchildren. The world has changed so much in my lifetime that I barely recognize the country I was born in. Just the little bit I've read about you, and by you, proves what a remarkable person you are. Your work is exactly what we need going forward if we are going to avoid collapse.
This is, without a doubt, one of the most compelling sales pitches I've ever experienced. I don't mean that in a derogatory sense, more in awe. I've pre-ordered the book, and converted from free to subscription. This, in spite of the fact that I already have so many subscriptions that keeping up is nearly a full-time job. At 76 I don't expect your book to change my life, but after I've read it I plan to pass it around to my 5 grandchildren. The world has changed so much in my lifetime that I barely recognize the country I was born in. Just the little bit I've read about you, and by you, proves what a remarkable person you are. Your work is exactly what we need going forward if we are going to avoid collapse.
Like (28)
Reply
Share
Belte
Belte
Belte
Belte
Belte
Feb 18, 2024
I bought several copies of Troubled to give to graduating high school students from troubled upbringings or who were adopted. They suffer greatly from confused identities and anti-social behaviors (praised by the elites). I think your book will help them immensely understand themselves through your personal journey. If one man can do it, perhaps so can they!
I bought several copies of Troubled to give to graduating high school students from troubled upbringings or who were adopted. They suffer greatly from confused identities and anti-social behaviors (praised by the elites). I think your book will help them immensely understand themselves through your personal journey. If one man can do it, perhaps so can they!
Like (16)
Reply
Share
Top
Latest
Discussions

Rob Henderson

Rob Henderson

Rob Henderson

Rob Henderson

Rob Henderson

Rob Henderson

Rob Henderson

Rob Henderson

Rob Henderson

Rob Henderson


undefined subscriptions will be displayed on your profile (edit)
Skip for now
For your security, we need to re-authenticate you.
Click the link we sent to sasha.p.podolsky@gmail.com, orclick here to sign in.