

1
Book meeting
Book a meeting
As I mentioned, this is the last chapter ofTroubledIll be sharing with you on my Substack. I wanted to end these serialization installments on a high note. So were jumping ahead to my arrival at Yale. This is actually an adaptation of Chapters Ten and Eleven of my book.
Here are the links for thepreface,Chapter One,Chapter Two, andChapter Three,Chapter Four,Chapter Five, andChapter SixandChapter Seven. Access is limited to paid subscribers.
Here are the links for the
,
,
, and
,
,
, and
and
. Access is limited to paid subscribers.
The sequence of events that led me to apply and somehow receive admission to Yale is an absurd story in itself involving skydiving, a suicidal coworker, my ex (wisely) splitting up with me, getting kicked in the face during a bar fight, alcohol poisoning followed by a stint in rehab followed by recovery, a perplexing interaction with an education counselor, and the West Wing television series. Get the book (or visit your local library) to read more.
We are skipping those chapters and moving into my college years, and how I developed the luxury beliefs framework.This adaptation will give you a sense of what the final third of the book is like.

Ipreviouslyasked my readers to write a short review/reaction of these chapters, and send me the reviewhere on this form. Upon the official date of publication (February 20), Ill request that you please share your review on Amazon or Goodreads.
I
asked my readers to write a short review/reaction of these chapters, and send me the review
. Upon the official date of publication (February 20), Ill request that you please share your review on Amazon or Goodreads.
I originally aimed to receive 50 reviews, and am pleased to see that so far 85 readers have sent a submission. So Im raising the target to 100.
As an added bonus, anyone who submits an early review will be eligible to join me on a 1-on-1 video call. When 100 reviews are submitted, I will select 20 reviewers at random and invite them to schedule a time to speak with me 1-on-1. Of course, if you send a review and then receive an email invitation from me asking if youd like to speak on a video call, you are obviously free to decline or ignore it. In that case, Ill just choose someone else. Basically, if you submit a review, you have a 1 in 5 chance of joining me for a conversation where you can ask me whatever you want. Questions about the book, psychology, human nature, social class, etc. Ordinarily, I charge a nontrivial rate for 1-on-1 meetings. But in this case, the only cost is writing a couple of sentences for a short review. If, in the end, less than 100 people submit a review, then Ill just select 20% of the reviewers at random to invite for a video call.
Reaching new readers is hard; reader reviews can make all the difference.
Its out in exactly 1 week (Feb 20), but as an author, pre-orders can make or break a book. Preorders are how the booksellers, reviewers, and publishers judge interest in a title. If youre sure you want to get it, please dont wait! Thank you.
Amazon (US)
Barnes & Noble
Bookshop
Amazon (UK)
Audible(I narrated the audiobook myself)
(I narrated the audiobook myself)
Other book vendors
There were many surreal aspects of my experience at Yale, including the ability to learn from high-profile professors. I took a course on Shakespeare taught by the late Harold Bloom, who has been described as the most renowned, and arguably the most passionate, literary critic and Shakespeare scholar in America. When I told him about my life, the eighty-seven-year-old professor gently replied, You were forged in a fire. I also met the psychology professor Albert Bandurawho at the time was 91 years old and died in 2021to chat about a book he had recently written. I was surprised at how late in life many professors workedsome well into their eighties and even nineties. This was a notable difference from the aging adults I knew in Red Bluff, who typically looked forward to retirement and preferred not to work longer than they had to, unless it was out of financial necessity.
Before my first classes were scheduled to begin, I was sitting in the courtyard of my residential college when a young woman asked for help lifting some boxes into her dorm room. She introduced herself and told me she was a senior. I explained that this was my first semester.
What do you think of Yale so far? she asked.
I was embarrassed to answer. I keep waiting for them to tell me it was a mistake that they let me in, I said, carrying boxes up the stairs as she guided me. Walking around, it feels like Im dreaming.
Thats such a great feeling, she replied wistfully. Enjoy it.
We entered her room and I set the boxes down. She opened the larger box and pulled out a large case of pills.
The medication rattled as she set it on her desk.
Nice stash. Anything for sale? I joked.
Yeah, the Adderall is. She didnt appear to be joking.
I thought back to my first day in high school, and how my neighbor offered to sell me drugs. Now here I was at this fancy college, and this senior is offering to sell drugs, too. Later, Id observe rampant drug and alcohol use on campus. This was at odds with the widespread belief, which I held at the time, that poverty was the primary reason for substance abuse.
Overall, I found that the vast majority of my peers were high-performers. One thing many people dont understand is that its usually not enough to be smart (or rich) to get into a top collegethese places reject many smart (and rich) applicants every year. You have to be diligent as well, and I respected their work ethic.
I came to understand that along with the fact that they were generally bright and hard-working, my peers on campus had experienced a totally different social reality than me, and had grown up around people just like them.
During my first semester, I felt out of my depth. I had received invaluable guidance at the Warrior-Scholar Project, but that program was only two weeks long.
In my first semester, I took a cognitive science class as part of my major. Id never read a scientific journal article before, and now I was assigned to read several each week. I had a heavy reading load from other courses as well. I wasnt entirely sure how to handle it, and read every assigned text. It was challenging to retain so much information and balance all of my assignments. On the midterm exam, my score placed me in the bottom quartile of the class.
I befriended some other students and picked up some tips. We held study sessions, and they showed me how to make flashcards, and how to review PowerPoint slides from the class. One simple approach I learned was to read a slide and then commit the information on it to memory, and go through that exercise a few times with each slide. Spaced repetitions. Other students taught me that for the assigned readings, they read a page, and then wrote bullets at the bottom of the page summarizing the most important points. These strategies might sound simple, but for me they were a revelation.
They helped me overcome years of poor study habits and the rust that had developed since high school. Of course, beyond mere memorization and regurgitation, courses required critical analysissynthesizing multiple ideas in essays and applying what wed learned to novel prompts in exams. I found that I was proficient at this once Id learned how to grasp and encode the vast amount of information assigned. I did well on the final exam and received a high score on my final paper.
My classmates taught me that I didnt have to read every single item on course syllabi. At first, I thought if I wasnt reading everything, then I was cheating myself out of my education. This, I discovered, is a common belief held by first-generation college students. I spoke with a variety of students about how they approached coursework, and noticed a distinct difference. Students from well-to-do backgrounds, who had parents who were college graduates, seemed to have developed a good sense of how to manage their assignments and understood that reading everything wasnt always necessary. Classmates showed me that we could split the heavy reading burdens by dividing it. Wed write up a summary of our share of the readings and notes.
The following semester, I managed to get into a psychology seminar that was intended primarily for seniors. Here, I realized that my upbringing differed from those of my fellow students in ways that extended beyond the financial status of our families. The professor asked the class to anonymously respond to a question about family background. Out of twenty students, only one other student besides me was not raised by both birth parents. Put differently, 90 percent of my classmates were raised by an intact family. I felt a sense of vertigo upon learning this, because it was so at odds with how Id grown up. Later, I read a study from another Ivy League schoolCornellwhich reported that only ten percent of their students were raised by divorced parents. This is a sharp juxtaposition with a national divorce rate of about forty percent, which itself is quite low compared to the families Id known in Red Bluff. When I explained to a classmate how disoriented I felt when I discovered these differences, she replied that this was how she felt when she learned that seven out of ten adults in the U.S. dont have a bachelors degree, because that was so out of line with her own experiences. What? I was surprised that it was only seven out of ten, because so few people Id known were college graduates.
In my first semester, I tried to get into a specific course titled, The Concept of the Problem Child. I read the course description:
Differing visions of good and bad, typical and atypical, children. Reasons why some children are seen as deviant and others as normal. Implications for public policy, medical practice, family dynamics, schooling, and the criminal justice and protective care systems. Sources include public health data, early childhood curricula, and depictions of problem children in literature and popular culture.
Differing visions of good and bad, typical and atypical, children. Reasons why some children are seen as deviant and others as normal. Implications for public policy, medical practice, family dynamics, schooling, and the criminal justice and protective care systems. Sources include public health data, early childhood curricula, and depictions of problem children in literature and popular culture.
For obvious reasons, I hoped to take this course. But it was capped, meaning only a limited number of students could join. Because around one hundred students had applied, many of them seniors, I was wait-listed. No big deal, I thought. Ill take it next time. I wrote an email to the instructor, Erika Christakis, thanking her for offering the course, and stated that I looked forward to applying again in the future.
I would soon learn this was the last time she would ever offer this course at Yale.
Walking through Old Campusthe oldest part of YaleI found a flier indicating that NYU professor Jonathan Haidt was visiting campus to give a talk. Id recently read his bestselling book The Righteous Mind: Why Good People Are Divided by Politics and Religion. I figured Professor Haidt would deliver a talk about moral psychology, the theme of his book. But instead, on the day of the talk, Haidt discussed the purpose of a university. He urged the audience to consider whether the aim of higher education is to protect students or equip them with the ability to seek truth, and he was clearly in favor of the latter.
I thought this was a strange talk. I sat there utterly perplexed. Why was he talking about this?
I simply didnt have the requisite background knowledge to understand. This new social environment was so unfamiliar to me that I hadnt realized there was a contentious national debate going on about the very nature of higher education.
Soon, the message of Haidts talk would become painfully clear. Just as my feelings of being a total outsider had begun to subside, they would suddenly resurface.
Two weeks later, I was sitting on a bench in front of Sterling Memorial Library, reading an email on my laptop by Erika Christakis, the instructor who taught the Concept of the Problem Child course.
Im confused, honestly, I said to the student next to me. I have no idea why people are upset about this.
He sighed. I knew that email would be controversial as soon as I read it, he said.
The university administration had recently circulated a campus-wide email to students asking them to be sensitive about what Halloween costumes they wear. The idea was that costumes that implied that other cultures or interests were unserious or played into stereotypes might cause discomfort or harm to other students. In response, Erika Christakis wrote an email to the students within her residential college. In her email, she questioned whether the administration should interfere with students livesshe defended freedom of expression, and urged students to handle disagreements about costumes on their own. The campus climate immediately changed. Hundreds of students marched throughout campus. They called for apologies from the university and insisted Christakis and her husband, who was also a professor and who defended her, be fired, among other demands.
Because I was older, sometimes students would crack jokes to me about the movie 21 Jump Street, about two twenty-five-year-old cops who go undercover to pose as students at a high school. Throughout the movie, the protagonists make subtle errors indicating a miniature generation gap. At no point did these jokes feel more apt than when I saw those students marching around campus, demanding the two professors be fired. I felt like they were speaking a language I didnt know.
Even the students who didnt agree that Erikas email was wrong knew why others thought it was wrong, but I was mystified. I would ask outraged classmates to explain what had been done wrong, hoping to understand.
A student from Greenwich, Connecticut who had attended Phillips Exeter Academy (an expensive private boarding school), explained that I was too privileged to understand the pain these professors had caused. At first, I was stunned. But later, I came to understand the intellectual acrobatics necessary to say something like this. The student who called me privileged likely meant that due to my background as a biracial Asian Latino heterosexual cisgender (that is, I present as the sex I was assigned at birth) male, this means that I have led a privileged life. However, I also learned that many inhabitants of elite universities assign a great deal of importance to lived experience. This means that your unique personal hardships serve as important credentials to expound on social ills and suggest remedies.
These two ideas appeared to be contradictory.
Which is more relevant to identity, ones discernable characteristics (gender, ethnicity, sexual orientation, and so on) or what they actually went through in their lives? I asked two students this question. One replied that this question was dangerous to ask. The other said that ones discernable characteristics determine what experiences they have in their lives. This means that if you belong to a privileged group, then you must have had a privileged life. I dropped the conversation there.
Id arrived at Yale nervous about the possibility of being intellectually limited compared with my peers on campus because of my impoverished background and poor grades in high school. As I encountered many of their inept ideas, my concerns evaporated.
I was fascinated by this new social reality, and avoided discussing my life when contentious discussions erupted. I really wanted to understand what these students thought without risking them being weirded out by someone in their midst who they might have acknowledged as having had a tougher life than them, and who disagreed that words in an email could actually inflict pain.
That was the language many students used. Danger and harm and pain. Words like trauma meant something different for them.
At a party, a young woman told me about her family and how theyd always expected her to get into a top college.
My mom was super strict growing up, she explained. Classic Asian mom, Im sure you know what I mean.
Well, my mom is Korean, I said. But my family life wasnt really like that.
Ah! she exclaimed. So you didnt have a traumatic childhood.
I had an apartment off-campus on Chapel Street. To get there, I had to walk through a lot of povertypeople suffering from drug addiction, homelessness, mental illness, and so on. Sometimes when Id walk through those areas, I would think about my birth mother, the foster homes Id lived in, and the people Id met in rehab. And then I would think about my classmates: At Yale, more students come from families in the top one percent of income than from the bottom 60 percent, and here they were ensconced in one of the richest universities in the world, claiming that they were in danger. Broadcasting personal feelings of emotional precarity and supposed powerlessness was part of the campus culture. Conspicuously lamenting systemic disadvantage seemed to serve as both a signal and reinforcer of membership in this rarified group of future elites.
Many students would routinely claim that systemic forces were working against them yet seemed pleased to demonstrate how special they were for rising above those impediments. This spawned a potent blend of victimhood and superiority. It was odd to see relatively advantaged people occupying elite institutions while seeing themselves as somehow beleaguered. Elite universities, in turn, seemed to deliver a double message to the students: You are the future leaders of the world, and You are being erased and marginalized. Id thought that by entering such a place, we were being given a privilege as well as a duty to improve the lives of those less fortunate than ourselves. Instead, many students seemed to be exploiting whatever commonalities they had with historically mistreated groups in order to serve their own personal, social, and professional interests.
I tried to understand the campus protesters, to see where they were coming from. But it was hard for me to sympathize, simply due to the magnitude of the gap between our experiences. Maybe their grievances were a bit overblown, but still, I tried to tell myself, theyre young. Theyre still maturing. Just like my enlisted friends and I were when we volunteered our lives for this country. Just like my friend was when he hanged himself after two deployments. I considered the differences in how fast people are expected to grow up based on how much money their families have. A twenty-year-old at an expensive college is viewed as not much more than a kid. A twenty-year-old in the military is trusted to carry a weapon, repair multimillion dollar equipment, and make life and death decisions.
Frankly, I found that college extends adolescence to a laughably old age. It was surreal to hear people say that college students are adults when they are vastly outnumbered by working class and poor people who face the full brunt of reality before they even turn eighteen. Interestingly, studies have found that people with adverse childhood experiencesphysical or emotional abuse, neglect, poverty, parental divorce, and so onseem to age faster. Children with stressful lives tend to get their adult teeth earlier, reach puberty sooner, and undergo accelerated changes in their brain structure. This also implies that a very comfortable upbringing might slow maturation. In high school, the guys I grew up with looked older than many of my college peers.
This maturity gap was evident even in small things like seeing my college friends attempt to drive a car. They got their licenses in high school and then spent a few years in college ordering Ubers to chauffer them around. Living in a college bubble, they were unpracticed at operating a vehicle. More than once Ive feared for my life sitting in the passengers seat of a rental while an inexperienced Yale graduate shook nervously while holding their hands at ten and two.
When I passed through the gates of the university and walked through downtown New Haven, I would occasionally think about howdespite their lofty rhetoricthe people educated at elite universities are often driven more by self-interest than implementing meaningful change. Solving the countrys most challenging social ills was a secondary concern.
I remember speaking with a fellow first-gen student at Yale who told me he was against legacy admissionsthe practice whereby elite universities give an advantage to applicants with parents or family members who are graduates.
Intrigued, I replied to this student, You had a harder upbringing than most students here, but you just got into law school, and will probably be a very successful in your career. If you have kids and they apply to Yale, should they be favored for admission?
Yes, he replied. But I worked really hard to give them that opportunity.
In other words, he was against legacy admissions in general, but supported it for his own children. He paid lip service to reducing inequality but personally endorsed something that would serve his interests.
Meanwhile, the student protests became a national story. Erika Christakis and her husband, Nicholas, were ridiculed and reviled, with little public support from students, faculty, or the administration. Privately, many peopleperhaps mostwere supportive, but they were fearful of openly expressing this. Erika was asked by some of the protestors to announce when she was going into the dining hall so that students wouldnt be triggered. She stepped down from her teaching position at the university, although her husband remained. After those incomprehensible events, I would gaze at the beautiful architecture throughout the university, and think about a line Id read from F. Scott Fitzgerald, describing Gatsbys forever altered relationship with the green light across the bay: His count of enchanted objects had diminished by one.
I watched students claim that investment banks were emblematic of capitalist oppression, and then discovered that theyd attended recruitment sessions for Goldman Sachs. Gradually, I came to believe that many of these students were broadcasting the belief that such firms were evil in order to undercut their rivals. If they managed to convince you that a certain occupation is corrupt and thus to be avoided, then that was one less competitor they had in their quest to be hired.
But they didnt see themselves this way. They viewed themselves as morally righteous and were surprisingly myopic about the virtuous image they held of themselves.
In December, shortly after the Yale-Harvard football game, one of my peers explained to the rest of the class that shed seen a group of Harvard students at a New Haven restaurant leave a huge mess at their table.
I hope the restaurant staff knew those people were from Harvard, not Yale! said another student.
I doubt they care, I replied, thinking of my days as a bus boy. They just saw a bunch of spoiled students. Harvard, Yale, it doesnt matter. The mess is the same.
Another time, I was on a social media page where Ivy League students and graduates shared stories about their schools. Someone had posted a story about Yeonmi Park, a North Korean refugee who had graduated from Columbia University. Park described her alarm about how the monolithic culture at her Ivy League school reminded her of her home country. The top-rated comment, the one with the most like and love reactions: She should have stayed in North Korea. They couldnt bear the criticism, and posted endless meanspirited comments mocking Park, with some saying she should go back to go back to Pyongyang.
Ordinarily, the people who visited this webpage would have considered the statement that a refugee should have stayed where she came from to be reprehensible (and it is). But in this instance it was lauded because Parks comments undermined these peoples view of themselves as morally righteous. Many students and graduates of top universities are terrified of being seen as what they really are. We dont leave messes for other people to clean up, its those other elite students from that other school. Were not xenophobic, its those unenlightened people who didnt go to a fancy college. We havent cultivated an ideologically rigid environment, go back where you came from.
In my second year, I learned about a psychology study that investigated moral intuitions. One question asked about incest between a brother and sister. The study found that across different countries, people overwhelmingly stated that sibling incest was wrong. One particular group of people the researchers tested, though, showed a moderate willingness to condone it: students at elite colleges.
After reflecting on this strange finding, I would occasionally ask students this very question to test it myself. Most said yes, sibling incest was fine, assuming no pregnancy. I asked them other questions, like whether it would be okay for an adult to have a romantic relationship with their parenta man and his father, for instanceand every person I asked said yes. Some were clearly uncomfortable with their answers but could find no reason to object.
The following year, I had lunch with a student from one of my courses. He said he believed in utilitarianism, which is the idea that moral decisions should be made based on maximizing the overall happiness of the most people. For instance, if two (or perhaps more than two) adult family members could increase their happiness by entering a romantic relationship, then many utilitarians would endorse it. Many utilitarians also believe that sacrificing a smaller number of people for a larger number would be acceptablethe ends justify the means. My classmate and I discussed various moral dilemmas, and he said he would push a man off a bridge to stop a train from hitting five people.
I asked if he would murder his mother to save five strangers. He promptly responded that he would.
I doubted anyone I knew outside of college would have said yes to that question. I later read a study that found that upper class people are more likely to endorse utilitarianism and the belief that the ends justify the means. One reason for this is that affluent people score relatively low on measures of empathy, and favor cold calculations for decision-making. Upon reading this, I thought about how students would sometimes tactically undermine their competitors to get prestigious internships.
I was also mystified at how my peers kept up with the latest news headlines. More than once, someone would ask me what I thought about some trending event covered in the media. When I replied that I hadnt heard of the event, people would look at me as if I were an alien. In the same way that you dont notice how entrenched you are in your specific culture or nationality until you travel to another country, you also dont notice your social class until you enter another one. I had never learned to keep up with the news.
Growing up, Mom and Shelly subscribed to our local paper, Red Bluffs Daily News, but they never discussed political or social issues at the dinner table. And we couldnt afford cable, so I didnt watch any of the popular political shows. On campus, though, there was an expectation to know about the issues of the day, and it was common to see the latest editions of the New York Times or the Wall Street Journal in libraries and residential colleges. The university also offered steep discounts for subscriptions to a variety of periodicals, presumably because these outlets aimed to build lifelong loyalty with students. I came to understand that part of integrating into this community meant having a cursory knowledge of the latest op-eds and fashionable news items.
On campus, it wasnt necessarily important to know about the concrete details of a newsworthy event. Rather, it was more critical to know what to think about the event by reading the opinions of others. Back when my life was difficult, I seldom read the news. But now that my life was more comfortable and my future more secure than it had ever been, I was being told that it was important to keep up with it. Being informed wasnt important for day-to-day survival, but in this new environment it seemed to be relevant for social acceptance.
Interestingly, working-class Americans are more likely to read local news, while the wealthy and highly educated favor national and global news. To me, it makes sense to keep up with whats going on in your local community. But there seems to be less practical reason to regularly read about events far removed from you, unless you aim to show others how worldly and sophisticated you are.
Meanwhile, I continued finding myself in situations I didnt quite understand.
In my second year of college, I decided to join a writing team for an on-campus humor magazine. The theme for that months issue was puberty. In a brainstorming session for satirical headlines, I suggested: Area male discovers porn goldmine in his front right pocket.
The student editor raised an eyebrow. Why does it have to be gendered? he asked. I was mystified. What did gendered mean? No one I grew up around ever used this word. No one in the military ever said it. I knew what gender was, of course, but why would anyone turn it into an adjective? I grew to understand that there were aspects of social class that cant be quantified or put on a resume.
Whenever I felt like an outsider, I sought refuge in helping others. Because of the way reading had transformed my life, I volunteered at New Haven Reads, tutoring kids from low-income families with their literacy skills. One boy named Guillermo was in the second gradethe same grade I was in when Id learned to read. After his mom dropped him off and was out of earshot, he quietly said he didnt think he would ever learn to read. I told him I thought the same thing when I was his age.
He didnt believe me. I thought Yale students are supposed to be smart.
Im not sure about that, I replied. But it was really tough for me to learn to read.
My mom says reading is important because she doesnt want me to be like my dad. But I dont know if he ever read, I never met him.
He said it impassivelythe same way I would have said it at his age. It conveyed that he didnt feel put upon because his life had always been that way, but he simultaneously wished it were different.
I never met my dad either, I said.
I told Guillermo about my childhood and how I grew up. He became more eager to learn after I told him about my experiences reading kindergarten-level books when I was in the second grade. In our next session, we learned how to spell his favorite snacks.
I knew what it was like to be in his position. By contributing my time to him and the other kids there, I hoped maybe they would someday know what it is like to be in mine.
But the ideas I would continue to encounter from members of the upper class were, perhaps inadvertently, hindering upward mobility.
In my attempt to understand class distinctions, I spent a lot of time thinking and reading about social hierarchies, and compared what Id learned with my experiences on campus. Gradually, I developed the concept of luxury beliefs, which are ideas and opinions that confer status on the upper class at very little cost, while often inflicting costs on the lower classes. The upper class includes (but is not necessarily limited to) anyone who attends or graduates from an elite college and has at least one parent who is a college graduate. Research has found that parental educational attainment is the most important objective indicator of social class. This is because, compared with parental income, parental education is a more powerful predictor of a childs future lifestyle, tastes, and opinions. In 2021, more than 80 percent of Ivy League students had parents with college degrees.
It is a vexing question whether first-generation college graduates can truly enter the upper class. Paul Fussellthe social critic and author of Classwrote that manners, tastes, opinions, and conversational style are just as important for upper class membership as money or credentials, and that to fulfill these requirements, you have to be immersed in affluence from birth. Likewise, the twentieth-century French sociologist Pierre Bourdieu stated that a triadic structure of schooling, language, and taste was necessary to be accepted among the upper class. Bourdieu described the mastery of this triad as ease. When you grow up in a social class, you come to embody it. You represent its tastes and values so deeply that you exhibit ease within it. This is one reason why, even among graduates of elite universities, parental social class predicts income and occupational prestige. People with parents who are college graduates are often better equipped to gain and maintain statusthey tend to be more adept at navigating organizations, smoothly interacting with colleagues, and positioning themselves for advancement.
Consistent with this, in 2021 the Pew Research Center found that among households headed by a college graduate, the median wealth of those who have a parent with at least a bachelors degree was nearly $100,000 greater than those who dont have college-educated parents. This bonus of being a continuing-generation (as opposed to a first-generation) college graduate has been termed the parent premium.
I dont have the parent premium. For extended periods of my youth, I had the opposite.
Its impossible to say that every individual in a particular class or category has the exact same features across the board. Still, graduates of elite universities generally occupy the top quintile of income, often wield outsized social influence, and are disproportionately likely to hold luxury beliefs which undermine social mobility.
For example, a former classmate at Yale told me Monogamy is kind of outdated and not good for society. I asked her what her background is and if she planned to marry. She said she came from an affluent family, was raised by both of her parents, and that yes, she personally intended to have a monogamous marriagebut quickly added that marriage shouldnt have to be for everyone. She was raised in a stable two-parent family, just like the vast majority of our classmates. And she planned on getting married herself. But she insisted that traditional families are old-fashioned, and that society should evolve beyond them.
My classmates promotion of one ideal (monogamy is outdated) while living by another (I plan to get married) was echoed by other students in different ways. Some would, for instance, tell me about the admiration they had for the military, or how trade schools were just as respectable as college, or how college was not necessary to be successful. But when I asked them if they would encourage their own children to enlist, or become a plumber or an electrician rather than apply to college, they would demur or change the subject.
Later, I would connect my observations to stories I read about tech tycoons, another affluent group, who encourage people to use addictive devices, while simultaneously enforcing rigid rules at home about technology use. For example, Steve Jobs prohibited his children from using iPads. Parents in Silicon Valley reportedly tell their nannies to closely monitor how much their children use their smartphones. Chip and Joanna Gaines are well-known home improvement TV personalities who have their own television network. They dont allow their children to watch TV and dont own a television. Dont get high on your own supply, I guess. Many affluent people now promote lifestyles that are harmful to the less fortunate. Meanwhile, they are not only insulated from the fallout; they often profit from it.
Gradually, I would learn the tastes and values of the group which I had not fully joined. I managed to piece together the luxury beliefs concept from my observations and readings to understand what I was seeing. In the past, people displayed their membership in the upper class with their material accouterments. But today, luxury goods are more accessible than before. This is a problem for the affluent, who still want to broadcast their high social position. But they have come up with a clever solution. The affluent have decoupled social status from goods, and re-attached it to beliefs.
Human beings become more preoccupied with social status once our physical needs are met. In fact, research has revealed that sociometric status (respect and admiration from peers) is more important for well-being than socioeconomic status.
It seems reasonable to think that the most downtrodden might be most interested in obtaining status and money. But this is not the case. Denizens of prestigious institutions are even more interested than others in prestige and wealth. For many of them, that drive is how they reached their lofty positions in the first place. Fueling this desire, theyre surrounded by people just like themtheir peers and competitors are also intelligent status-seekers. They persistently look for new ways to move upward and avoid moving downward. The French sociologist mile Durkheim understood this when he wrote, The more one has, the more one wants, since satisfactions received only stimulate instead of filling needs. And research supports this. A psychology study in 2020 revealed that, Upper-class individuals cared more about status and valued it more highly than working class individualsFurthermore, compared with lower-status individuals, high-status individuals were more likely to engage in behavior aimed at protecting or enhancing their status. Plainly, high-status people desire status more than anyone else.
You might think that, for example, rich students at elite universities would be happy because their parents are in the top one percent of income earners, and that statistically they will soon join their parents in this elite guild. But remember, theyre surrounded by other members of the one percent. For many elite college students, their social circle consists of baby millionaires, which often instills a sense of insecurity and an anxiety to preserve and maintain their positions against such rarified competitors.
Thorstein Veblens famous leisure class has evolved into the luxury belief class. Veblen, an economist and sociologist, made his observations about social class in the late nineteenth century. He compiled his observations in his classic 1899 book, The Theory of the Leisure Class. A key idea is that because we cant be certain of the financial standing of other people, a good way to size up their means is to see whether they can afford to waste money on goods and leisure. This explains why status symbols are so often difficult to obtain and costly to purchase. In Veblens day, people exhibited their status with delicate and restrictive clothing like tuxedos, top hats, and evening gowns, or by partaking in time-consuming activities like golf or beagling. Such goods and leisurely activities could only be purchased or performed by those who did not live the life of a manual laborer and could spend time learning something with no practical utility. Veblen even goes so far as to say, The chief use of servants is the evidence they afford of the masters ability to pay. For Veblen, even butlers were status symbols.
Veblen proposed that the wealthy flaunt these symbols not because they are useful, but because they are so pricey or wasteful that only the wealthy can afford them, which is why theyre high-status indicators.
During my first year at Yale in 2015, it was common to see students at Ivy League colleges wearing Canada Goose jackets. Is it necessary to spend nine-hundred dollars to stay warm in New England? No. But kids werent spending their parents money just for the warmth. They were spending the equivalent of the typical Americans weekly income ($865) for the logo. Likewise, are students spending $250,000 at prestigious universities for the education? Maybe. But they are also spending it for the logo.
As NYU professor Scott Galloway said in an interview in 2020, The strongest brand in the world is not Apple or Mercedes-Benz or Coca-Cola. The strongest brands are MIT, Oxford, and Stanford. Academics and administrators at the top universities have decided over the last 30 years that were no longer public servants; were luxury goods.
This is not to say that elite colleges dont educate their students, or that Canada Goose jackets dont keep their wearers warm. But top universities are also crucial for induction into the luxury belief class. Take vocabulary. Your typical working-class American could not tell you what heteronormative or cisgender means. But if you visit an elite college, youll find plenty of affluent people who will eagerly explain them to you. When someone uses the phrase cultural appropriation, what they are really saying is, I was educated at a top college. Consider the Veblen quote, Refined tastes, manners, habits of life are a useful evidence of gentility, because good breeding requires time, application and expense, and can therefore not be compassed by those whose time and energy are taken up with work. Only the affluent can afford to learn strange vocabulary because ordinary people have real problems to worry about.
The chief purpose of luxury beliefs is to indicate the believers social class and education. When an affluent person expresses support for defunding the police, drug legalization, open borders, looting, permissive sexual norms, or uses terms like white privilege, they are engaging in a status display. They are trying to tell you, I am a member of the upper class.
Focusing on representation rather than helping the downtrodden is another luxury belief. Many of the protestors on campus urged for more individuals from historically mistreated groups to be represented among students and faculty, among elite internships and occupations, and in influential positions in society at large. I thought of this as trickle down meritocracy. The idea seemed to be that the best way to help struggling communities is to pluck representatives out and put them into positions of power. As long as the ruling class has a few members from these communities, then somehow the advantages they accrue will trickle down to their communities. Thus far, there doesnt seem to be evidence that this works. Representation certainly benefits a handful of people who are chosen to enter elite spaces, but it doesnt seem to improve the lives of the dispossessed. In fact, it might backfire. Elite institutions strip-mine talented people out of their communities.
Upon graduating, most of these graduates do not return to their old neighborhoods. Instead, they relocate to a handful of cities where they live alongside their highly-educated peers, eroding the bonds of solidarity they had with those they left behind. And who could blame them? It is a reasonable to use your talents to advance your career and financial prospects. But if the original intent was to help languishing communities, then this particular solution is failing.
White privilege is the luxury belief that took me the longest to understand, because, as you now understand, I grew up around a lot of poor white (and Hispanic) people. Affluent white college graduates seem to be the most enthusiastic about the idea of white privilege, yet they are the least likely to incur any costs for promoting that belief. Rather, they raise their social standing by talking about their privilege. In other words, upper-class white people gain status by talking about their high status. When policies are implemented to combat white privilege, it wont be Yale graduates who are harmed. Poor white people will bear the brunt.
The upper class promotes abolishing the police or decriminalizing drugs or white privilege because it advances their social standing, not least because they know that the adoption of those policies will cost them less than others. The logic is akin to conspicuous consumptionif youre a student who has a large subsidy from your parents and I do not, you can afford to waste $900 and I cant, so wearing a Canada Goose jacket is a good way of advertising your superior wealth and status. Proposing policies that will cost you as a member of the upper class less than they would cost me serves the same function. Advocating for sexual promiscuity, drug experimentation, or abolishing the police are good ways of advertising your membership of the elite because, thanks to your wealth and social connections, they will cost you less than me.
Reflecting on my experiences with alcohol, if all drugs had been legal and easily accessible when I was fifteen, you wouldnt be reading this book. My birth mom was able to get drugs, and it had a detrimental effect on both of our lives. Thats something people dont think about: drugs dont just affect the user, they affect helpless children too. All of my foster siblings parents were addicts, or had a mental health condition, often triggered by drug use. But the luxury belief class doesnt think about that because such consequences seldom interrupt their lives. And even if they did, they are in a far better position to withstand such difficulties.
A well-heeled student at an elite university can experiment with cocaine and will in all likelihood be fine. A kid from a dysfunctional home with absentee parents will often take that first hit of meth to self-destruction. This is perhaps why a 2019 survey found that less than half of Americans without a college degree want to legalize drugs, but more than sixty percent of Americans with a bachelors degree or higher are in favor of drug legalization. Drugs are frequently considered a recreational pastime for the rich, but for the poor they are often a gateway to further pain.
Similarly, a 2020 survey found that the richest Americans showed the strongest support for defunding the police, while the poorest Americans reported the lowest support. Throughout the remainder of that year and into 2021, murder rates throughout the U.S. soared as a result of defunding policies, officers retiring early or quitting, and police departments struggling to recruit new members after the luxury belief class cultivated an environment of loathing toward law enforcement.
The luxury belief class appears to sympathize more with criminals than their victims. Its true that most criminals come from poor backgrounds. But its also true that their victims are mostly poor. And the perpetrators tend to be young men, and their targets are often poor women or the elderly. Moreover, because there are many times more victims than there are criminals, to not stop criminals is to victimize the poor. Yet the movement to abolish the police is disproportionately championed by affluent people. A key inhibition against crime is the belief that our legal system is legitimate. Which means that those who promote the idea that we live in an unjust society also help to cultivate crime.
The poor reap what the luxury belief class sows.
Consider that compared to Americans who earn more than $75,000 a year, the poorest Americans are seven times more likely to be victims of robbery, seven times more likely to be victims of aggravated assault, and twenty times more likely to be victims of sexual assault. And yet, as I write this, many affluent people are calling to abolish law enforcement.
Maybe the luxury belief class is ignorant of the realities of who is most harmed by crime. Or perhaps they dont care that the poor will become even more victimized than they already are.
Unfortunately, like fashion trends that debut on the runway and make it into J.C. Penney three years later, the luxury beliefs of the upper class often trickle down and are adopted by people lower down the food chain, which means many of these beliefs end up causing social harm. Take polyamory, which involves open or non-monogamous relationships where people have multiple partners at the same time. A student at a top university once explained to me that when the radius on his dating apps to five miles, about half of the women, mostly other students, said they were polyamorous in their bios. Then, when he extended the radius to 15 miles to include the rest of the city and its outskirts, about half of the women were single mothers. Polyamory is the latest expression of sexual freedom championed by the affluent. They are in a better position to manage the complications of novel relationship arrangements. And if these relationships dont pan out, or if kids are involved, those involved can more easily recuperate thanks to their financial capability and social capital. Meanwhile, the less fortunate suffer as the beliefs of the upper class spread throughout society as a result of their disproportionate influence.
Most personal to me is the luxury belief that family is unimportant, or that children are equally likely to thrive in all family structures. In 1960 the percentage of American children living with both biological parents was identical for affluent and working-class families95 percent. By 2005, 85 percent of affluent families were still intact, but for working-class families the figure had plummeted to 30 percent. The Harvard political scientist Robert Putnam at a 2017 Senate hearing stated, Rich kids and poor kids now grow up in separate AmericasGrowing up with two parents is now unusual in the working class, while two-parent families are normal and becoming more common among the upper middle class. Affluent people, particularly in the 1960s, championed sexual freedom. Loose sexual norms caught on for the rest of society. The upper class, though, still had intact families. Generally speaking, they experimented in college and then settled down later. The families of the lower classes fell apart.
This deterioration is still happening. In 2006, more than half of American adults without a college degree believed it was very important that couples with children should be married. Fast forward to 2020, and this number has plummeted to 31 percent. Among college graduates, only 25 percent think couples should be married before having kids. Their actions, though, contradict their luxury beliefs: the vast majority of American college graduates who have children are married. Despite their behavior suggesting otherwise, affluent people are the most likely to say marriage is unimportant,. Gradually, their message has spread.
Ive also heard graduates of top universities say marriage is just a piece of paper. People shouldnt have to prove their commitment to their spouse with a document, they tell me. I have never heard them ridicule a college degree as just a piece of paper. Many affluent people belittle marriage, but not college, because they view a degree as critical for their social positions.
Here is an example of how this phenomenon works. Before my first year of college, I had never even been to a musical. No one I knew from Red Bluff had ever been to one. But it seemed like everyone on campus had seen Hamilton, the acclaimed musical about the American founding father Alexander Hamilton.
I looked up tickets: $400. This was way beyond my budget. So in 2020, I was pleased to see that five years after Hamiltons debut, it was available to view on Disney+. But suddenly, the musical was being denigrated by many of the same people who formerly enjoyed it, because it didnt reflect the failings of American society in the eighteenth century. The creator of Hamilton, Lin-Manuel Miranda, even posted on Twitter that All the criticisms are valid. This reveals how social class works in America. It is not a coincidence that when Hamilton tickets were prohibitively expensive, affluent people loved it, and now that it can be viewed by ordinary Americans, they ridicule it. Once something becomes too popular, the elites update their tastes to distinguish themselves from ordinary people.
In 2015, seeing Hamilton was a major status symbol. In 2020, it didnt mean much. And this is why the affluent suddenly turned on the musical. Its a status game, with members of the upper-class distancing themselves from something that had become too popular. Once a piece of art becomes mainstream, elites must distance themselves from it and redirect their attention to something new, obscure, or difficult to obtain. The affluent relentlessly search for signals that distinguish them from the masses.
A former classmate recently told me that he didnt enjoy Hamilton, but never told anyone because everyone at Yale loved it. However, once the musical became unfashionable, he suddenly became open about his dislike of it. I noticed that many Yale students selectively concealed their opinions or facts about their lives. More than one student quietly confessed to me that they pretended to be poorer than they really were, because they didnt want the stigma of being thought rich. Why was it a stigma to be known as rich at a rich university full of rich students? Its a class thing. For the upper class, indicating your social position by speaking about money is vulgar, sharing your educational credentials less so, and broadcasting your luxury beliefs is the least tackyor most favorableof all.
Furthermore, it is harder for wealthy people to claim the mantle of victimhood, which, among the affluent, is often a key ingredient to be seen as a righteous person. In fact, researchers at Harvard Business School and Northwestern University recently found evidence of a Virtuous Victim effect, in which victims are seen as more moral than non-victims who have behaved in exactly the same way. People are inclined to positively evaluate those who have suffered. Plainly, if people think you are a victim, they will be more likely to excuse your detestable behaviors. But ironically, the most well-off are also the most capable of accentuating their supposed marginalization. They can communicate their hardships in a language that other well-to-do people can understand. Prestigious universities encourage students to nurture their grievances, giving rise to a peculiar situation in which the most advantaged are the most well-equipped to tell other advantaged people how disadvantaged they are.
The upper class drive to distinguish themselves from the masses explains the ever-evolving standards of luxury beliefs. To become fully acculturated into the elite requires knowing the habits, customs, and manners of the upper class. To stay up to date, you need lots of leisure time or have the kind of job that allows you to browse Twitter. A common rebuke to those who are not fully up to date on the latest intellectual fads is, educate yourself. This is how the affluent block mobility for people who work multiple jobs, have children to care for, and dont have the time or means to read the latest bestseller that outlines the proper way to think about social issues. And by the time they do, as was the case with Hamilton, the cultural fashions will have shifted yet again. Thus, it seems the affluent secure their positions by ensuring that only those who attend the right colleges, listen to the right podcasts, and read the right books can join their inner circle.
Occasionally, I raised these critiques to fellow students or graduates of elite colleges. Sometimes they would reply by asking, Well, arent you part of this group now? implying that my appraisals of the luxury belief class were hollow because I moved within the same institutions. But they wouldnt have listened to me back when I was a lowly enlisted service member, or back when I was washing dishes for minimum wage. If you ridicule the upper class as an outsider, theyll either ignore you or tell you that you dont know what youre talking about. But if you ridicule them as an insider, they call you a hypocrite. Plainly, the requirements for the upper class to take you seriously (e.g., credentials, wealth, power) are also the grounds to brand you a hypocrite for making any criticism of the upper class.
But I dont want to give the impression that only the well-to-do care about or react to symbols. Shortly after enlisting, I bought Mom a license plate frame for her 2006 Toyota Camry that read U.S. Air Force Mom. Cheesy, I know. But shed been eyeing it at a store on base, and the frame was a way of expressing how proud she was of me. Mom told me that it has gotten her out of more than a few speeding tickets.
Cops pull me over and ask about it. I tell them my boy is serving overseas and they let me off with a warning. A ten dollar piece of plastic probably saved a thousand bucks. Not a bad investment.
Later, Mom told me another story.
I was wearing my Yale Mom cap at softball practice with the local recreational team. Someone came up to me and asked, Is that real? Pointing at my head, kind of rude about it.
What did you say? I asked Mom.
I just nodded and said yeah. What a strange question!
To Mom, the hat was just a way of expressing how proud she was of me. Still, we both agreed that it probably wouldnt get her out of any speeding tickets.
I also worked with a former Marine who was interested in attending college. I took a special interest in Daniel because of our similar upbringings. He had been born to a mother who became addicted to crack and, as a consequence, Daniel was placed in foster care as a child. We worked together on his college applications, and he earned admission to Brown University. Seeing him accomplish his educational goals almost made me happier than when Id done so. In his first semester, Daniel expressed dismay at seeing students on his campus burning American flags on Veterans Day. It seemed like he was having the same misgivings about his new surroundings as I had when I first entered Yale.
Another veteran friend at a different college asked me, Dont you ever feel like a sucker for serving?
I paused, unsure what to say. I didnt feel like a sucker. But I would come to understand what he was getting at.
Somethings off about the whole thing. We swear that oath about upholding the constitution. Then these rich kids who are the same age as us when we enlisted are actively undermining it. Pretty weird.
Undermining how? I asked.
The first two amendments, he continued. The general opinion at these schools is that the first needs a major overhaul and the second should be completely dismantled. Seems like we basically got duped into believing we are upholding American values while the future ruling class are figuring out ways to undermine them.
I could sense his feeling of betrayal. I grew to understand that, at least within some upper class circles, patriotism and support for the constitution marks one as a rube. The irony was not lost on mestudents who would burn flags or attempt to silence dissenting viewpoints were being protected by the very principles they despised and the people to whom they felt superior. Even the students from affluent backgrounds who were patriotic and believed in the American Dream seldom publicly expressed it. They withheld their views to fit in and avoid ostracism.
I realized that even dietary choices reflected class differences. Yale dining halls had soda fountains that nobody used, save for the one nozzle that dispensed water. The halls also offered spa water which was water flavored with cucumbers or strawberries. Id always associated that with rich people on TV. Comparing this to my high school, I couldnt go more than ten minutes at my high school without seeing someone carrying a Powerade or a Pepsi. There was a striking absence of obesity among the studentsmany of them seemed to be preoccupied with their weight and image. I learned a term Id never heard before: fat shaming. It was remarkable that students who seldom consumed sugary drinks and often closely adhered to nutrition and fitness regimens were also attempting to create a taboo around discussions of obesity. The unspoken oath seemed to be, I will carefully monitor my health and fitness, but will not broadcast the importance of what I am doing, because that is fat shaming. The people who were most vocal about what they called body positivity, which seemed to be a tool to inhibit discussions about the health consequences of obesity, were often very physically fit.
The luxury belief class thinks that the unhappiness associated with certain behaviors and choices primarily stems from the negative social judgments they elicit, rather than the behaviors and choices themselves. But in fact, negative social judgments often serve as guardrails to deter detrimental decisions that lead to unhappiness. In order to avoid misery we have to admit that certain actions and choices are actually in and of themselves undesirablesingle parenthood, obesity, substance abuse, crime, and so onand not simply in need of normalization.
Indeed, its cruel to validate decisions that inflict harm, especially on those who had no hand in the decisionlike young children.
Before starting my final year of college, I got a position as a summer research assistant at Stanford University. This was an ideal location because it was close to Mom, who lived nearby in San Jose. At Stanford, I helped with research on developmental psychology, running studies with young children. I was interested in doing this kind of research because Id taken a class with Yale psychology professor Frank Keil, who, during a lecture, said, If you want to understand the mature form of an organism, it helps to understand its history.
In the evenings at Stanford, I took a GRE prep course, hoping to score well enough to get into a good PhD program. I figured if I was going to study psychology, I should go as far as I could and get a comprehensive education. So I signed up to take the GRE course, which was about as dull as youd expect, but the instructor said something that stuck with me.
Many of the reading comprehension passages in the verbal section of the GRE, he explained, are drawn from periodicals like The Atlantic or Scientific American. This is because graduate programs believe these kinds of articles are set at the right level for a bright college graduate to be able to grasp quickly. But they are also testing for people who read these kinds of magazines.
In other words, the instructor claimed the test screens for social class as well as academic ability. The Atlantic characterizes its subscribers as affluent and accomplished. A survey found that 77 percent of their readers have a bachelors degree and about half have an annual household income of more than $100,000. In contrast, only thirty-two percent of American adults aged 25 or older have graduated from college, and only 25 percent of American households make more than $100,000 a year.
While at Stanford, I discovered another pernicious luxury belief.
I was living in a house on campus with a bunch of students for the summer. I asked a housemate who was working on a startup how hed gotten into Stanford, and the steps he was taking to build his company.
He paused for a moment, and said Ultimately, it comes down to luck.
As soon as he said that, it occurred to me that this mindset is pervasive at Yale as wellfar more common than among the people I grew up around or the women and men I served with in the military. Many of my peers at Yale and Stanford would work ceaselessly. But when Id ask them about the plans theyd implemented to get into college, or start a company, or land their dream job, theyd often suggest they just got lucky rather than attribute their success to their efforts. Interestingly, it seems like many people who earn status by working hard are able to boost their status among their peers even more by saying they just got lucky. This isnt just limited to my own observations, either. A 2019 study found that people with high income and social status are the most likely to attribute success to mere luck rather than hard work.
Both luck and hard work play a role in the direction of our lives, but stressing the former at the expense of the latter doesnt help those at or near the bottom of society. If disadvantaged people come to believe that luck is the key factor that determines success, then they will be less likely to strive to improve their lives. One study tracked more than 6,000 young adults in the U.S. at the beginning of their careers over the course of two decades, and found that those who believed that lifes outcomes are due to their own efforts as opposed to external factors became more successful in their careers and went on to attain higher earnings.
Getting back to my conversation with the guy at Stanford, hed told me a few days prior that he had a younger sister. So I asked, If your sister asked you how to get into Stanford or start a company, would you shrug and say, I just got lucky or would you explain whatever it was that you actually did. You have to study, sacrifice, work on the weekends, or whatever?
He rolled his eyes before replying, Yeah, I get it.
Successful people tell the world they got lucky but then tell their loved ones about the importance of hard work and sacrifice.
Critics of successful people tell the world those successful people got lucky and then tell their loved ones about the importance of hard work and sacrifice.
By this point, after three years immersed in this kind of thinking, I lost that state of deep curiosity about this environment that I had back when I started college. Now, I felt I had a decent understanding of the social milieu of top universities. But at Stanford, I gleaned some further insights at a top preschool.
As a summer research assistant, I visited the Bing Nursery School at Stanford every morning to help recruit children to be participants in studies for the psychology department. The kids at this preschool tend to come from well-heeled familiesmuch different from the kids I worked with in New Haven. Many things about this Stanford nursery intrigued me, from how many teachers each classroom had (usually at least two), how they encouraged the childrens creativity and curiosity, how well-behaved the children were (very), and what they ate at snack time. I didnt see a single Fruit Roll-Up or Flamin Hot Cheeto. Instead, the teachers served the kids celery with peanut butter, slices of cheese, and pieces of banana. I wondered how my life might have been different if Id gone to this kind of preschool. Probably not much different, considering how turbulent my home life was.
One thing that surprised me was how attentive these kids were in our research studies. Typically, developmental psychology researchers exclude some children from their analyses if their responses indicate that they misunderstood the questions. At Stanford, we excluded around ten to 20 percent of the child participants. But at schools in New Haven, we sometimes had to exclude more than half of the kids. Considering what a dismal elementary school student Id been, I almost certainly would have been excluded from these kinds of studies for not paying attention.
Near the end of my internship, I was out in the playground helping a few kids dig a hole in the sand pit. One of the boys mentioned hed gone out to eat with his family the night before.
What did you have for dinner? I asked.
Arugula salad, he replied. But usually I get squid ink.
I didnt know what surprised me morethe choice of food or the fact that he pronounced arugula perfectly.
One of the other kids chimed in and said she hated squid ink. I asked her what her favorite dessert was.
Lemon meringue pie.
And here I thought every little kid hated the taste of lemon, just like I had.
Up ahead, I saw that a new kid had joined the class. It was her first day and Id noticed shed been quiet throughout the afternoon. She was understandably shy in this new environment. She stared at a model wooden car in the middle of the grass. Two other little girls were in the front seat pretending to drive. The new girl tepidly climbed into the back seat of the car.
Hey, she said to the two girls. How about I be sick, and you two are the ambulance drivers?
The two girls in the front seat shook their heads.
Okay, um, how about I be a bad guy? And youre the cops!
The two girls again shook their heads. The new girl in the back seat looked over at me, maybe hoping Id suggest some other ideas.
One of the girls in the front seat whispered a little too loudly, Look, shes distracted. They both ran off.
The new kid looked away from me, apparently hoping I hadnt seen what just happened.
Waves of grief washed over me. I knew what it was like to be the new kid. My response to that kind of social rejection would have been to break something or start a fight with someone or swear at the teacher. This kid just sat quietly.
I handed my shovel to one of the boys nearby, picked up a basketball, and walked over to the girl. I spun the ball on my finger, which Id learned to do years ago with a cheap rubber ball Id bought at Wal-Mart.
Want to learn how to do this? I asked.
She smiled and tried to take the ball from me. I spun it again and placed it on her finger. Afterward, we sat in the nursery as one of the teachers read Not Quite Narwhal aloud to the kids. The story is about a lonely unicorn who is raised by whales and doesnt quite fit in. I glanced at the new girl, who sat completely still, captivated by this story. I realized: Reading about others who had survived the vicissitudes of their youth helped carry me through my turbulent childhood, too.
Id been hung up on how to communicate how my life had informed my views about childhood, family, and success. Fortunately, Id been accepted into The War Horse Writing Seminar at Columbia University. The program was designed to help veterans write about their experiences. At first, it was intimidating, because unlike college classes or the Warrior-Scholar Project, this seminar was about personal, as opposed to academic, writing. At Columbia, I wrote a rough draft of a personal essay reflecting on my upbringing but didnt let anyone read it.
On the final day of the seminar, Jim Dao, then the deputy op-ed editor at the New York Times, visited our class and invited us to pitch him if we ever had any ideas. I approached him later, telling him about how my college essay had run in the Times back in 2015. Jim handed me his card, and encouraged me to send him anything else I had. I glanced down at the essay Id been working on, about to tell him about it, and then quietly returned to my seat. I wasnt ready to share it.
Three months later, in May of 2017, I sent it to Jim, unsure how realistic it was to expect a reply. To my surprise, he got back to me within an hour, saying that he liked it. Another editor emailed me, saying they would run it soon.
Months later, I followed up. Total radio silence. I wasnt sure how assertive to be in this situation, but I figured I might as well keep at it. I sent follow-up emails every two weeks for the next few months. I didnt receive a response to any of them.
It didnt bother me though, because in yet another surreal moment, I received notification that my application for a Gates Cambridge scholarship to study for a doctorate at the University of Cambridge was successful. With a 1.3% acceptance rate, obtaining the scholarship was even more unlikely than getting into Yale. Applicants had to demonstrate academic excellence, leadership ability, and a commitment to improving the lives of others. Between my college transcript, military experience, and my unusual upbringing, I figured Id be competitive, but I was far from confident.
Now, I couldnt believe I was going back across the Atlantic yet again.
My final year of college was about to conclude.
After the Yale graduation ceremony, I met with Mom and Hannah for dinner. We didnt realize that the restaurants around campus had set menus for graduation day. At the restaurant we visited, the plates were usually around forty dollars per dish on a regular night. This was a bit pricey, but we figured we could splurge, because it was graduation day. But we discovered there was a set menu charging $120 per person, presumably because the restaurateurs knew how little the amount mattered to rich Yale parents. This unseen menu reminded me of all the other unseen phenomena I had to learn throughout the past few years in this new milieu. Moms posture stiffened as she looked at the prices. We all looked up at the same time and laughed.
Hey, lets go around the corner, I suggested.
There was a Chinese restaurant about a block from my apartment downtown. When we arrived, I checked to make sure there was no set menu. Plates were priced at a much more manageable twelve to fifteen dollars.
So, who was that guy? my sister asked, referring back to Matthews drunken exclamation before the ceremony that my family had won the adoption lottery.
Hang on, sorry, I said. My phone had been ringing all day with an unknown number, and I couldnt answer it amid the graduation proceedings.
I stepped outside and picked up. Hello?
Hello, is this Rob?
It is.
Hey, Aaron Retica here from the New York Times. Weve published your piece online and just want to ask a couple questions before the print version runs tomorrow.
Oh, great. We had gone over edits a couple of weeks prior, but they were coy when I asked when they expected it would be published. I was glad theyd run it, but also felt trepidationbecause of the fear of judgment, mostly. In my college application essay, Id been forthcoming about my early life. But in this new essay, I tried to communicate the clarity Id gained from those experiences. I wrote about the importance of family and responsibility, drawing from my turbulent childhood experiences. Four years ago, I could barely talk about any of this in rehab with Alan, and now I was sharing it with the world. I wondered if Id made a mistake. Maybe itll help someone else out there who reads it.
I answered Aarons questions. He mentioned that hed also attended Yale, and he asked if it was graduation day. I told him it was, and that I was at dinner with my family.
Thanks Rob, and sorry for interrupting. But at least you can say you got a call from theTimesat your graduation dinneritll make a good story.
Thanks Rob, and sorry for interrupting. But at least you can say you got a call from the
at your graduation dinneritll make a good story.
Through the windowpane of the restaurant, I saw my family inside. Ever since I left home, Id been focused on trying to escape my past. Id strived to be independent so that I wouldnt have to rely on anyone. But now, what mattered most to me was to become someone who could be relied upon. I glanced behind me, in the direction of the campus, and it struck me: What is the point of pursuing education and striving for success? The answer, I realized, was to take care of the family who couldnt take care of me. And, for my future family, to be a better dad than any of my dads had been to me. The bar, I thought, was mercifully low.
I thought about how the reason I was even getting this phone callthe reason my op-ed was noteworthy enough to catch an editors attentionwas because of how few of these family dinners Id had growing up. Looking inside the restaurant, I realized that I would have traded this op-ed, Yale, Cambridge, and all the other amazing things that happened over the last few years to have never had to witness so much grief and disrepair growing up, and to have had more of these family dinners as a kid. I just wanted to get back to this one. So I thanked Aaron and returned to the seat next to my sister.
Please write a short review/reaction andpost it here on this form. Or, if you prefer, you can also email me your review (rob@robkhenderson.com).
Please write a short review/reaction and
. Or, if you prefer, you can also email me your review (rob@robkhenderson.com).
This is the last of these Substack installments. In the final portions of the book, I tie everything together. I share my thoughts as I stand now, analyzing everything that Id experienced as a child and as a teenager living in instability, squalor, and dysfunction who later achieved some semblance of upward mobility, and what it all means. In other words, I offer my more mature observations and thoughts as a writer and psychologist. If you want to read those final chapters, you gotta get the book (or get a copy at your local library).
Comments
Restacks
N E B
N E B
Feb 13, 2024
Forged in fire.
Forged in fire.
Absolutely outstanding chapter,  drawing together such diverse experiences and brings the luxury beliefs theory into brilliant focus.  Its also disturbing, in many ways, just evokes so many emotions.  I truly believe that this book can change lives, it can reach young readers, it can inspire, give hope and possibly even help build a future where change can happen on a much larger scale.
Absolutely outstanding chapter,  drawing together such diverse experiences and brings the luxury beliefs theory into brilliant focus.  Its also disturbing, in many ways, just evokes so many emotions.  I truly believe that this book can change lives, it can reach young readers, it can inspire, give hope and possibly even help build a future where change can happen on a much larger scale.
Thank you for sharing some incredibly painful personal experiences, that cannot have been easy.
Thank you for sharing some incredibly painful personal experiences, that cannot have been easy.
On a more trivial note, I was perplexed by the menu choices of the young kids at the Stanford Nursery; and I noted that the some of the childrens palates seemed skewed towards bitter tasting foods (arugula, squid ink, lemon) and remembered seeing a study about taste and personality traitshttps://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/abs/pii/S0195666315300428
On a more trivial note, I was perplexed by the menu choices of the young kids at the Stanford Nursery; and I noted that the some of the childrens palates seemed skewed towards bitter tasting foods (arugula, squid ink, lemon) and remembered seeing a study about taste and personality traitshttps://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/abs/pii/S0195666315300428
The TLDR version is that bitter taste preferences might indicate some type of antisocial personality traits.  Aside from giving a good laugh, I wondered if you ever encountered that particular theory.
The TLDR version is that bitter taste preferences might indicate some type of antisocial personality traits.  Aside from giving a good laugh, I wondered if you ever encountered that particular theory.
Fabulous work, Rob, thanks for what you are doing and I was completely riveted by this chapter, unable to look away until I finished the chapter, that of course is the best indication that your book is a must read; hopefully it will get widely distributed into libraries (public, private and school).
Fabulous work, Rob, thanks for what you are doing and I was completely riveted by this chapter, unable to look away until I finished the chapter, that of course is the best indication that your book is a must read; hopefully it will get widely distributed into libraries (public, private and school).
Like (10)
Reply
Share
COMRADITY
COMRADITY
COMRADITY
COMRADITY
COMRADITY
Feb 13, 2024
Wow.
Wow.
Thank you for restoring my hope for the future because you still have lots of time to make a difference.
Thank you for restoring my hope for the future because you still have lots of time to make a difference.
Your writing is provocative because it steps back to see the whole picture, judges with love and respect, and transcends the politicization of one of the most significant crises of modern civilization - family.
Your writing is provocative because it steps back to see the whole picture, judges with love and respect, and transcends the politicization of one of the most significant crises of modern civilization - family.
Like (7)
Reply
Share
Top
Latest
Discussions

Rob Henderson

Rob Henderson

Rob Henderson

Rob Henderson

Rob Henderson

Rob Henderson

Rob Henderson

Rob Henderson

Rob Henderson

Rob Henderson


undefined subscriptions will be displayed on your profile (edit)
Skip for now
For your security, we need to re-authenticate you.
Click the link we sent to sasha.p.podolsky@gmail.com, orclick here to sign in.