

1
Book meeting
Book a meeting
One of my favorite things about writing on Substack is that every time I share something useful, interesting, or entertaining, I get a raise.
I launched the first iteration of this newsletter in January of 2020 on MailChimp. A little over two years later, in April of 2022, I moved over to Substack. I shared my thoughts after year onehere.
I launched the first iteration of this newsletter in January of 2020 on MailChimp. A little over two years later, in April of 2022, I moved over to Substack. I shared my thoughts after year one
.
When I wrote my1 year reflectionsa year ago, this newsletter had 33 thousand total subscribers and about 1,500 paid subscribers. We now have more than 55 thousand total subscribers, with more than 2,300 paid subscribers. Seventeen have chosen to become Founding Members and pay $500 a year. According to the image below, I have more Substack followers than subscribers, I guess because some people just want toreadmy notes. Theres a number floating around out there suggesting you can expect 10% of your free subscribers to go paid. In my experience (and from what Ive heard from other Substack writers), though, the number is typically something closer to 4 or 5 percent. Im happy to say that this Substack is a growing and sustainable day job.
When I wrote my
a year ago, this newsletter had 33 thousand total subscribers and about 1,500 paid subscribers. We now have more than 55 thousand total subscribers, with more than 2,300 paid subscribers. Seventeen have chosen to become Founding Members and pay $500 a year. According to the image below, I have more Substack followers than subscribers, I guess because some people just want to
my notes. Theres a number floating around out there suggesting you can expect 10% of your free subscribers to go paid. In my experience (and from what Ive heard from other Substack writers), though, the number is typically something closer to 4 or 5 percent. Im happy to say that this Substack is a growing and sustainable day job.
As Imentionedlast year, I havent concentrated much effort on growth for growths sake:
As I
last year, I havent concentrated much effort on growth for growths sake:
Throughout building my newsletter, I havent implemented much readership growth advice from other people. Growth is not number one on my agenda. This might be why I havent received spectacular bursts of attention and subscribers. Ive seen other writers who share charts indicating rapid and punctuated instances of major subscription increases. My Substack is not that way. Similar to Twitter, my experience with newsletters (both the first Mailchimp version and now Substack) has been one of gradual, reliable growth, brick by brick, fueled primarily by word of mouth. I think growth is important, its nice to see, and Im not shy about sharing my work online and on Twitter. Still, growth has never been my primary goal. Ive noticed that when I write about topics directly or indirectly related to politics and culture war stuff, it sometimes gets a lot of attention. Still, this hasnt spurred me to lean in that direction. Ive never felt susceptible to audience capture. My personal political views arent exactly a secret. But Ive never been particularly interested in politics and have never been a news junkie. I grew up without cable, so no Stewart/Colbert or CNN or Fox News, and in my early adolescence I was raised by working-class Democrats who read the local paper. Politics just wasnt part of my life and it didnt really seep into my consciousness until I arrived on campus in 2015. As Ive written before, I try to avoid (sometimes unsuccessfully) the news. I prefer reading books, academic articles, and longform essays. Im far more interested in human nature, class, status signaling, relationships, history, philosophy, social science, ideology, and so on.
Throughout building my newsletter, I havent implemented much readership growth advice from other people. Growth is not number one on my agenda. This might be why I havent received spectacular bursts of attention and subscribers. Ive seen other writers who share charts indicating rapid and punctuated instances of major subscription increases. My Substack is not that way. Similar to Twitter, my experience with newsletters (both the first Mailchimp version and now Substack) has been one of gradual, reliable growth, brick by brick, fueled primarily by word of mouth. I think growth is important, its nice to see, and Im not shy about sharing my work online and on Twitter. Still, growth has never been my primary goal. Ive noticed that when I write about topics directly or indirectly related to politics and culture war stuff, it sometimes gets a lot of attention. Still, this hasnt spurred me to lean in that direction. Ive never felt susceptible to audience capture. My personal political views arent exactly a secret. But Ive never been particularly interested in politics and have never been a news junkie. I grew up without cable, so no Stewart/Colbert or CNN or Fox News, and in my early adolescence I was raised by working-class Democrats who read the local paper. Politics just wasnt part of my life and it didnt really seep into my consciousness until I arrived on campus in 2015. As Ive written before, I try to avoid (sometimes unsuccessfully) the news. I prefer reading books, academic articles, and longform essays. Im far more interested in human nature, class, status signaling, relationships, history, philosophy, social science, ideology, and so on.
Two years on, and were still thenumber 4science newsletter on this platform.
Two years on, and were still the
science newsletter on this platform.
This underscores the need for independent writing. Weekly essays delivered to your inbox on a reliable day at a reliable time (Sunday morning), along with bonus posts and recommendations, without any ads, affiliate links, pop-ups, SEO bait, or any other increasingly familiar features of our online landscape.
Mechanical consistency is an underrated approach to building a readership. Everyone wants the secret sauce or the smash hit viral article. But the real secret is to develop a reliable and dependable writing schedule.
The psychologist Dean Keith Simonton hasfoundthat one notable attribute that distinguishes high performers is volume:
The psychologist Dean Keith Simonton has
that one notable attribute that distinguishes high performers is volume:
A small percentage of workers is responsible for the bulk of the work...the top 10% of the most prolific elite can be credited with 50% of all contributions, whereas the bottom 50% of least productive workers can claim only 15%...the most productive contributor is about 100 times more prolific than the least.
A small percentage of workers is responsible for the bulk of the work...the top 10% of the most prolific elite can be credited with 50% of all contributions, whereas the bottom 50% of least productive workers can claim only 15%...the most productive contributor is about 100 times more prolific than the least.
This goes for anyone in a competitive domain that requires some creativity. It definitely applies to podcasters (the vast majority of podcasters never produce more than 20 episodes) and newsletter writers (so often I see people write a few good posts and then go dark). Regular output is key. Do the work, accept that most of your work will be fair-to-middling, and be grateful for the occasional home run.
On social media, each tweet and post competes with every other post. But this newsletter competes mostly with the other emails in your inbox.
I recently read astudyindicating thatunsurprisinglynegative words in headlines increase click-through rates (words like wrong, bad, awful, hate, sick, etc.). Such headlines are optimized to perform well on social media, and play on fear and outrage. One reason newsletters have become successful is that they have different incentives. I notice that the open rate for this newsletter remains the same (around 40%), regardless of headlines. Its gratifying to know that readers will open whatever I happen to publish that day.
I recently read a
indicating thatunsurprisinglynegative words in headlines increase click-through rates (words like wrong, bad, awful, hate, sick, etc.). Such headlines are optimized to perform well on social media, and play on fear and outrage. One reason newsletters have become successful is that they have different incentives. I notice that the open rate for this newsletter remains the same (around 40%), regardless of headlines. Its gratifying to know that readers will open whatever I happen to publish that day.
Here are some notable posts throughout the past year:
How I readMy (non)secrets on how to read more.
My (non)secrets on how to read more.
Why Dumb Ideas Capture Smart and Successful PeopleIntelligence is a general purpose tool. It can help you find the truth, yes, but it can also help you know which opinions to express to navigate social hierarchies.
Intelligence is a general purpose tool. It can help you find the truth, yes, but it can also help you know which opinions to express to navigate social hierarchies.
What is Social Status?I cover the major empirical findings and theoretical frameworks on dominance, prestige, and power.
I cover the major empirical findings and theoretical frameworks on dominance, prestige, and power.
Being Poor Doesn't Have the Same Effect as Living in ChaosFor childhood outcomes, we focus too much on poverty, and not enough on instability and disorder.
For childhood outcomes, we focus too much on poverty, and not enough on instability and disorder.
Victim Signaling and Dark Triad Personality TraitsPeople who are high on narcissism, psychopathy, and Machiavellianism are adept at exploiting peoples sympathy to extract rewards.
People who are high on narcissism, psychopathy, and Machiavellianism are adept at exploiting peoples sympathy to extract rewards.
Youre Probably Not the Person Im JudgingClarifying just who it is that Im criticizing when I write about luxury beliefs, and explaining my views on elites.
Clarifying just who it is that Im criticizing when I write about luxury beliefs, and explaining my views on elites.
Swiping and Dating PreferencesExploring gender divides in sex and relationships
Exploring gender divides in sex and relationships
Without Belief in a God, But Never Without Belief in a DevilDiscussing what might be the most important non-fiction book Ive ever read.
Discussing what might be the most important non-fiction book Ive ever read.
The Grand Canyon-Sized Chasm Between Elites and Ordinary AmericansIvy Leaguers versus everyone else.
Ivy Leaguers versus everyone else.
How To Choose A Romantic PartnerA literature review of the relevant research in mating psychology, and how it can inform your romantic decisions.
A literature review of the relevant research in mating psychology, and how it can inform your romantic decisions.
Americas Lost Boys and MeA glimpse into my early life, which you can read more about inmy book.
A glimpse into my early life, which you can read more about in
.
The archives also contain gated posts for premium subscribers onenvy, thesexual dimension of social status, reflections onintimacy in long-term relationships, tips for how toimprove your social skills, the termliberal elites, unfiltered thoughts on therecent Andrew Huberman saga, and much more.
The archives also contain gated posts for premium subscribers on
, the
, reflections on
, tips for how to
, the term
, unfiltered thoughts on the
, and much more.
A few people have asked how much time I spend running this newsletter. In terms of actual, physical, writing, re-writing, and editing, maybe 8 hours a week. But I spend the majority of my waking hoursmaybe 50-60 hours a weekreading, thinking, note-taking, brainstorming, speaking with other writers, academics, journalists, and so on. All of that goes into my writing. When I'm in the shower mulling over a recent psychology paper or having a coffee chat with a professor or reading my Kindle app on the train or jotting notes on my phone when I'm out for a walk, does that count as working on my Substack? I also occasionally write about my life more generally. Unclear whether living life also counts as being on the clock. In a given week, were awake for around 115 hours. So in a typical week, I either put in about 8 hours into my Substack or 115. Depends on how you look at it. A lot of jobs that require creativity or innovation or unique skill sets are like this. In a way, youre always on the clock.
Many of you are recent subscribers, coming here after having read my debut bookTroubled.
Many of you are recent subscribers, coming here after having read my debut book
.
One thing I learned recently is that yes, you can use social media and your newsletter to promote a book. But you can also use your book to promote your newsletter and your other platforms.
Ordinarily, this newsletter attracts around 1-2 thousand (free + paid) new subscribers per month. During the month of my book launch (Feb 20  March 20) it gained more than 4 thousand new subscribers. Perhaps triple the usual growth rate.
When you have a book out and it gets some buzz and attention, you get invited on podcasts. Maybe you get a segment or two on TV. Most people who see you on a 3 minute TV segment or listen to you on a podcast arent going to buy your book. Thats just the reality. A small number of listeners and viewers, though, will look you up online.
Maybe they find you on X or Instagram. Or come across your newsletter. Maybe they follow you for a while. If, after a few weeks or a few months, they like what they see, they consider getting your book. Maybe they sign up for a paid newsletter subscription. The funnel goes something like podcast appearance > follow the person on X > enjoy their tweets > sign up for their newsletter > take pleasure in or find useful information in their writing > get their book and/or subscribe for premium membership.
Many people have noted how difficult it is to sell books. Even celebrities with millions of followers are havingdifficultymoving as many copies as their sizeable social media platforms would supposedly predict.
Many people have noted how difficult it is to sell books. Even celebrities with millions of followers are having
moving as many copies as their sizeable social media platforms would supposedly predict.
In a posttitledNo one will read your book, Elle Griffin writes:
In a post
No one will read your book, Elle Griffin writes:
In reality, books compete for our reading time alongside newspapers, magazines, and other online publications...To make it onto a readers nightstand, an author will have to compete with the roughly 3 million books currently in print.
In reality, books compete for our reading time alongside newspapers, magazines, and other online publications...To make it onto a readers nightstand, an author will have to compete with the roughly 3 million books currently in print.


As with anything, theres an element of luck that goes into a books success. Still, things arent entirely up to fortune. Authors have some degree of control.
Platform matters. The medium through which people become accustomed to your work matters. Generally speaking, people will enjoy a creators work in the mode theyre used to. For example, if readers enjoy reading a writers material online, then theyll most likely enjoy reading it in book-form, too. But if youre used to watching a Tik Tok influencer on your phone or a movie star on the big screen, its less clear if that will translate into book sales.
If you want people to read your book, it helps if theyre accustomed to reading your writing. Ive heard that popular podcasters who become authors often sell far more audiobooks than hardcovers or ebooks. Which makes sense. People are used to hearing their voice. Theyre comfortable with that person in their ear. So they buy the persons book in the format theyre accustomed to. All this implies that if you want people to read your book, start a newsletter. If you want people to listen to your book, maybe podcasting or Tik Toking is the right call.
Candidly, there were moments when I worried whether my bookTroubledwould retain relevance by the time it launched. Particularly the final few chapters where I write about the culture of elite colleges. Last year, after the resignations of two Ivy League presidents, my concerns were put to rest. Whatever has infected the culture of higher ed remains as salient as ever. It was already apparent by the time I arrived at Yale in 2015. Im glad those chapters ofTroubledexist as firsthand documentation of the moment when this new wave of political correctness began spilling out of colleges.
Candidly, there were moments when I worried whether my book
would retain relevance by the time it launched. Particularly the final few chapters where I write about the culture of elite colleges. Last year, after the resignations of two Ivy League presidents, my concerns were put to rest. Whatever has infected the culture of higher ed remains as salient as ever. It was already apparent by the time I arrived at Yale in 2015. Im glad those chapters of
exist as firsthand documentation of the moment when this new wave of political correctness began spilling out of colleges.
Arthur Koestler:
A writers ambition should be to trade a hundred contemporary readers for ten readers in ten years, and for one reader in a hundred years. But the general atmosphere in this country directs the writers ambition into different channels ... on immediate success here and now. Religion and art are the two completely non-competitive spheres of human striving and they both derive from the same source. But the social climate in this country has made the creation of art into an essentially competitive business. On the best-seller chartsthis curse of American literary lifeauthors are rated like shares on the Stock Exchange.
A writers ambition should be to trade a hundred contemporary readers for ten readers in ten years, and for one reader in a hundred years. But the general atmosphere in this country directs the writers ambition into different channels ... on immediate success here and now. Religion and art are the two completely non-competitive spheres of human striving and they both derive from the same source. But the social climate in this country has made the creation of art into an essentially competitive business. On the best-seller chartsthis curse of American literary lifeauthors are rated like shares on the Stock Exchange.
I dont mind the competitive nature of the market and I am a fan of capitalism (or a strong skeptic of its alternatives). But the part about being read by even one reader in a hundred years time is something most authors desire. Between the early chapters covering life in late twentieth century American squalor and the later chapters documenting elite campus culture I thinkTroubledwill stand the test of time. Thinking about the book, I still feel nostalgia for the early 2000s in the same way that most people feel for the period when they came of age in their adolescence. In some waysTroubledis an ode to that era. If you look at the trends Jean Twenge identifies inGenerationsand Jonathan Haidt shares inThe Anxious Generation, my generationmillennials who came of age in the flip phone erawas the last normal generation among those born in the twentieth century. The last generation before the steep decline ingetting drivers licenses, going on dates, obtaining paid employment as a teenager, taking risks, getting into fights, and so on. The last generation before the sharp rise in safetyism. The only people who have noticed my lack of a bicycle helmet on my book cover are Zoomers and parents of Zoomers.
I dont mind the competitive nature of the market and I am a fan of capitalism (or a strong skeptic of its alternatives). But the part about being read by even one reader in a hundred years time is something most authors desire. Between the early chapters covering life in late twentieth century American squalor and the later chapters documenting elite campus culture I think
will stand the test of time. Thinking about the book, I still feel nostalgia for the early 2000s in the same way that most people feel for the period when they came of age in their adolescence. In some ways
is an ode to that era. If you look at the trends Jean Twenge identifies in
and Jonathan Haidt shares in
, my generationmillennials who came of age in the flip phone erawas the last normal generation among those born in the twentieth century. The last generation before the steep decline in
, going on dates, obtaining paid employment as a teenager, taking risks, getting into fights, and so on. The last generation before the sharp rise in safetyism. The only people who have noticed my lack of a bicycle helmet on my book cover are Zoomers and parents of Zoomers.
Generally, it seems like working-class kids trail behind in terms of the characteristics that define each generation. Technological and cultural changes reach upper and upper-middle-class kids first, and those are the people who define the archetypal attributes of each generation. The experiences my friends and I had growing up are more consistent withxennials(analog childhood and digital adulthood) than millennials. Anyway, my guess is this book will still be interesting to readers in 10 years. And perhaps even 1 reader in 100 years.
Generally, it seems like working-class kids trail behind in terms of the characteristics that define each generation. Technological and cultural changes reach upper and upper-middle-class kids first, and those are the people who define the archetypal attributes of each generation. The experiences my friends and I had growing up are more consistent with
(analog childhood and digital adulthood) than millennials. Anyway, my guess is this book will still be interesting to readers in 10 years. And perhaps even 1 reader in 100 years.
Another thing Ive recently learned about writing is that books can strengthen peoples real-life relationships. Sometimes people say they feel they know me after reading my Substack or reading my book. Its not really true. You know the small part of my life that I share. As Kevin Kelly writes in his compendiumExcellent Advice for Living, You see only 2% of another person and they see only 2% of you. With writers, you can bump it up to maybe 4 percent. With memoirists, 20 percent or 30 percent. But 70 percent remains inaccessible (sometimes even to ourselves). Still, its unsurprising for readers to develop parasocial bonds with authors. More meaningful, though, are the messages I receive from people who listen to my book with their kids, or friends, or loved ones and they tell me it created a space for them to be more open with one another about their own experiences and memories. The other day a father wrote to me explaining he and his kids listened to my audiobook during a road trip and it created an avenue for them to express their reflections about events in their own family. Writing can bring readers closer to people in their own lives and strengthen their existing relationships. Social relationships are more important than parasocial ones.
Another thing Ive recently learned about writing is that books can strengthen peoples real-life relationships. Sometimes people say they feel they know me after reading my Substack or reading my book. Its not really true. You know the small part of my life that I share. As Kevin Kelly writes in his compendium
, You see only 2% of another person and they see only 2% of you. With writers, you can bump it up to maybe 4 percent. With memoirists, 20 percent or 30 percent. But 70 percent remains inaccessible (sometimes even to ourselves). Still, its unsurprising for readers to develop parasocial bonds with authors. More meaningful, though, are the messages I receive from people who listen to my book with their kids, or friends, or loved ones and they tell me it created a space for them to be more open with one another about their own experiences and memories. The other day a father wrote to me explaining he and his kids listened to my audiobook during a road trip and it created an avenue for them to express their reflections about events in their own family. Writing can bring readers closer to people in their own lives and strengthen their existing relationships. Social relationships are more important than parasocial ones.
Im pleased with the success ofTroubled.Ithasgarneredmanypositivereviewsinmultipledifferentoutlets, most recently in theWall Street JournalandThe Economist, along withAmazonandGoodreads(many thanks to those of you who have posted your reviews). True that bookstores didnt want to host any book events. True that the NYT didnt list me on their bestseller list. The success of this book, though, has demonstrated that there is an audience who will read this type of memoir. I hope it encourages other aspiring authors from similarly unpromising origins to write their book, and perhaps that will be the one that makes a difference. My book might not be the one to get elites to truly pay attention to what has happened to kids and families in this country. But my hope is that it will help to pave the way for the more worthy and talented author who writes the book that will.
Im pleased with the success of
.









, most recently in the
and
, along with
and
(many thanks to those of you who have posted your reviews). True that bookstores didnt want to host any book events. True that the NYT didnt list me on their bestseller list. The success of this book, though, has demonstrated that there is an audience who will read this type of memoir. I hope it encourages other aspiring authors from similarly unpromising origins to write their book, and perhaps that will be the one that makes a difference. My book might not be the one to get elites to truly pay attention to what has happened to kids and families in this country. But my hope is that it will help to pave the way for the more worthy and talented author who writes the book that will.
The moral arc of content is long, and it bends toward having to pay for good writing.
For more than 4 years, Ive made the (sometimes difficult) decision to keep the vast majority of my writing free. But as I transition into the next phase of life, financial considerations loom larger. Starting next month, an increasingly larger share of my posts will be available for premium subscribers only.
For the past two yearssince hosting this newsletter on Substackmy posting routine has been something like 2 free posts per week + 1 bonus gated post for premium subscribers only. Soon, this pattern will flip to something like 2 gated + 1 free. However I decide to do it, most of my upcoming posts will be available for premium subscribers only.
Many essays in the works. A few I have in my scattered notes:
Dieting, weightlifting, exercise, and experiences with weight fluctuations (bouncing between 164 and 206 lbs) and how I found a comfortable routine that keeps me at about 175 lbs. AfterTroubled, I wanted to avoid writing about myself for a while. But a lot of readers have asked me about my diet/health/fitness routine (its not complicated, but so many Substack writers are out of shape that it surprises people when they see one who is reasonably fit) so Ill write it up
Dieting, weightlifting, exercise, and experiences with weight fluctuations (bouncing between 164 and 206 lbs) and how I found a comfortable routine that keeps me at about 175 lbs. After
, I wanted to avoid writing about myself for a while. But a lot of readers have asked me about my diet/health/fitness routine (its not complicated, but so many Substack writers are out of shape that it surprises people when they see one who is reasonably fit) so Ill write it up
Who are the modern shamans and gurus? What does it mean to develop your insides? This essay will be an unconventional review of a classic 1972 sociology textThe Hidden Injuries of Social Class
Who are the modern shamans and gurus? What does it mean to develop your insides? This essay will be an unconventional review of a classic 1972 sociology text
The question of whether luxury beliefs are held intentionally or unconsciously
Over-interpreting findings from behavioral genetics is a right-wing luxury belief
A Marxian analysis of children as a class-in-themselves but not a class-for-themselves
Relational models theory (what Steven Pinker once characterized as the only overarching theory of social psychology)
The surprising link between Dark Triad personality traits and anti-natalism (the belief that its wrong to have children)
The link between political orientation and inclination toward criminal offending
Workshopping chapters for a future book specifically about luxury beliefs. Ill ask readers for their feedback and notes
The neurotic paradox
What does it mean to be an outsider?
A review ofCodes of the Underworld: How Criminals Communicate
A review of
Some people have asked why this newsletter has a higher price than other Substacks. The answer is a) I pay for a lot of books, publications, and newsletters to stay up to date on the latest psychology research, b) This is my primary means of income, and c) my large collection ofarchived essaysare evergreen and timeless; Im not chasing trends or reacting to the latest headlines. I truly enjoy running this newsletter and might wish to do it in some form until I keel over at my desk and collapse into a pile of books. I also refuse to do ads or affiliate marketing.
Some people have asked why this newsletter has a higher price than other Substacks. The answer is a) I pay for a lot of books, publications, and newsletters to stay up to date on the latest psychology research, b) This is my primary means of income, and c) my large collection of
are evergreen and timeless; Im not chasing trends or reacting to the latest headlines. I truly enjoy running this newsletter and might wish to do it in some form until I keel over at my desk and collapse into a pile of books. I also refuse to do ads or affiliate marketing.
In addition to Substack, I have plenty of other commitments occupying my time. I recently accepted a regular columnist position at a prominent newspaper. Most of my writing will remain on this newsletter. Itll be similar to what Tyler Cowen does with his Marginal Revolution blog and his Bloomberg column. Ill make a formal announcement about it soon. I recently spoke about my book at the Oxford Literary Festival. Ill be at Yale this Thursday delivering a talk about my book (free and open to the public). Im scheduled to speak at the U.S. Marines Memorial in San Francisco in July. Other public events coming up.
In addition to Substack, I have plenty of other commitments occupying my time. I recently accepted a regular columnist position at a prominent newspaper. Most of my writing will remain on this newsletter. Itll be similar to what Tyler Cowen does with his Marginal Revolution blog and his Bloomberg column. Ill make a formal announcement about it soon. I recently spoke about my book at the Oxford Literary Festival. Ill be at Yale this Thursday delivering a talk about my book (
). Im scheduled to speak at the U.S. Marines Memorial in San Francisco in July. Other public events coming up.
Im taking some much needed time off for the next few weeks. But your inbox wont be completely free of me. Ill continue to send out a weekly links roundup + recommendations on Sundays, along with essays from the archives. Youll soon receive instructions if you want to plug your writing on this newsletter. Similar to what we didlast year.
Im taking some much needed time off for the next few weeks. But your inbox wont be completely free of me. Ill continue to send out a weekly links roundup + recommendations on Sundays, along with essays from the archives. Youll soon receive instructions if you want to plug your writing on this newsletter. Similar to what we did
.
I continue to be thankful for your support. Thanks for reading.
To receive new posts, access more than100 premium archived posts, and support my work, consider becoming a free or paid subscriber.
Subscribed

Comments
Restacks
Sheldon H.
Sheldon H.
Sheldons Substack
Sheldons Substack
Sheldons Substack
Apr 7
My book might not be the one to get elites to truly pay attention to what has happened to kids and families in this country. But my hope is that it will help to pave the way for the more worthy and talented author who writes the book that will.
My book might not be the one to get elites to truly pay attention to what has happened to kids and families in this country. But my hope is that it will help to pave the way for the more worthy and talented author who writes the book that will.
Saw this on one of your recent X tweets, and it filled me with hope.
Saw this on one of your recent X tweets, and it filled me with hope.
I read half of Troubled on a an annual trip to DC recently where I was discussing the effects of banking legislation and regulations with industry leaders and legislators. It helped me frame a lot of the perspectives I had in luxury beliefs.
I read half of Troubled on a an annual trip to DC recently where I was discussing the effects of banking legislation and regulations with industry leaders and legislators. It helped me frame a lot of the perspectives I had in luxury beliefs.
Its a great book and Ive enjoyed it so far.  I can relate to a lot of it from my own life experiences. Unfortunately, I inadvertently left it on the return flight home.
Its a great book and Ive enjoyed it so far.  I can relate to a lot of it from my own life experiences. Unfortunately, I inadvertently left it on the return flight home.
That means someone now has a free copy of it, and I will also be reordering it to finish it.
That means someone now has a free copy of it, and I will also be reordering it to finish it.
Like (15)
Reply
Share
Lost In Alabama
Lost In Alabama
Lost In Alabama
Lost In Alabama
Lost In Alabama
Apr 7
Rob, I have learned so much from your newsletter in these past months after accidentally discovering it on Substack. I am a paid subscriber and am currently reading your book. Like you, I did not get into politics until 2015. I get most of my news from Substack augmented with Apple News and the mostly biased nowal.com(formerly The Birmingham Newspaper). I rarely watch the news unless there is a government hearing Im interested in.
Rob, I have learned so much from your newsletter in these past months after accidentally discovering it on Substack. I am a paid subscriber and am currently reading your book. Like you, I did not get into politics until 2015. I get most of my news from Substack augmented with Apple News and the mostly biased nowal.com(formerly The Birmingham Newspaper). I rarely watch the news unless there is a government hearing Im interested in.
I love your writing because it says so beautifully what I believe and feel. I identify with so many of your experiences at 46 years old. Im definitely snagging the book you mentioned about believing in the Devil but not God.
I love your writing because it says so beautifully what I believe and feel. I identify with so many of your experiences at 46 years old. Im definitely snagging the book you mentioned about believing in the Devil but not God.
Maybe its a sort of midlife crisis, but maybe its more of a midlife awakening for me. At 45, my life took an unexpected turn or an inevitable one. Im not sure yet. I guess I found your writing at the right time. I have always been a voracious reader and think that this is what saved me from falling into the cult of Trump here in Alabama.
Maybe its a sort of midlife crisis, but maybe its more of a midlife awakening for me. At 45, my life took an unexpected turn or an inevitable one. Im not sure yet. I guess I found your writing at the right time. I have always been a voracious reader and think that this is what saved me from falling into the cult of Trump here in Alabama.
I wanted to be a writer as a young adult. I dreamt of studying at Oxford in middle school, which is not very common in rural Alabama. I have to thank my parents for this dream, because they always encouraged my love of reading. Unfortunately, they didnt believe that being a writer was a good financial decision. My parents steered me toward medical school instead. I ended up a pharmacist, but it is not my first love. Whether or not I write in the future, I am very grateful for yours!
I wanted to be a writer as a young adult. I dreamt of studying at Oxford in middle school, which is not very common in rural Alabama. I have to thank my parents for this dream, because they always encouraged my love of reading. Unfortunately, they didnt believe that being a writer was a good financial decision. My parents steered me toward medical school instead. I ended up a pharmacist, but it is not my first love. Whether or not I write in the future, I am very grateful for yours!
Like (13)
Reply
Share
Top
Latest
Discussions

Rob Henderson

Rob Henderson

Rob Henderson

Rob Henderson

Rob Henderson

Rob Henderson

Rob Henderson

Rob Henderson

Rob Henderson

Rob Henderson


undefined subscriptions will be displayed on your profile (edit)
Skip for now
For your security, we need to re-authenticate you.
Click the link we sent to sasha.p.podolsky@gmail.com, orclick here to sign in.