

1
Book meeting
Book a meeting
Below is the sixth chapter of my forthcomingbook,Troubled: A Memoir of Foster Care, Family, and Social Class.
Below is the sixth chapter of my forthcoming
,
Here are the links for thepreface,Chapter One,Chapter Two, andChapter Three,Chapter Four, andChapter Five. Access is limited to paid subscribers.
Here are the links for the
,
,
, and
,
, and
. Access is limited to paid subscribers.
Ipreviouslyasked my readers to write a short review/reaction of these chapters, and send me the reviewhere on this form. Upon the official date of publication (February 20, 2024), Ill request that you please share your review on Amazon or Goodreads.
I
asked my readers to write a short review/reaction of these chapters, and send me the review
. Upon the official date of publication (February 20, 2024), Ill request that you please share your review on Amazon or Goodreads.
So far 45 readers have submitted reviews; Im aiming for at least 50.
As an added bonus, anyone who submits an early review will be eligible to join me on a 1-on-1 video call. When 50 reviews are submitted, I will select 10 reviewers at random and invite them to schedule a time to speak with me 1-on-1. Of course, if you send a review and then receive an email invitation from me asking if youd like to speak on a video call, you are obviously free to decline or ignore it. In that case, Ill just choose someone else. Basically, if you submit a review, you have a 1 in 5 chance of joining me for a conversation where you can ask me whatever you want. Questions about the book, psychology, human nature, social class, etc. Ordinarily, I charge a nontrivial rate for 1-on-1 meetings. But in this case, the only cost is writing a couple of sentences for a short review.
Selling books is hard; reader reviews really can make all the difference.
And a reminder to please pre-order my book:
Pre-Order Now
Pre-Order Now
The implicit question throughout these early chapters is why more and more children and adolescents who should be nurtured, looked after, and mentored, find themselves having to navigate such treacherous terrain.
Something that occurred to me only after I wrote this book is that the destructive consequences of the 1960s cultural revolution harmed people in order of their marginalization, predilections, and vulnerability.
Poor black families got hit first. Then poor Hispanics and poor whites. By the time I was growing up in the 1990s, ordinary working and lower-middle-class areas of California (mostly white and Hispanic) were being plagued by the erosion of what were formerly common sense conventional social norms and cultural guardrails. Marriage, neighborliness, thriftiness, hard work, punctuality, striving, respectfulness, integrity, decency, and so on.
Interestingly, I think if Id been adopted maybe 20 years earlierin the 1970s, say, instead of the late 1990smy life would have been more stable. There was a bit of a lag before the cultural rot oozed into working/lower-middle-class families across the U.S.
To be clear, there was more than one movement in the 1960s. College-educated upper-middle-class people co-opted the moral authority of the civil rights movement to promote a separate cause involving substance abuse, sex with strangers, family estrangement, and so on. And any time someone points this out they play a language game, stealing the valor of a nobler movement to disguise their separate cause.
Rob Henderson had an incredibly challenging upbringingraised as a foster kid in circumstances most children (thankfully) never know. His educational achievements are extraordinary. Whats more extraordinary is that hes a keen observer of both the world he came from and the world he now inhabits. He has learned the importance of family despite never having one of his own, and he delivers that message in a gripping way. Read this book. It will challenge both your heart and mind. A rare feat.J.D. Vance, author ofHillbilly Elegy
Rob Henderson had an incredibly challenging upbringingraised as a foster kid in circumstances most children (thankfully) never know. His educational achievements are extraordinary. Whats more extraordinary is that hes a keen observer of both the world he came from and the world he now inhabits. He has learned the importance of family despite never having one of his own, and he delivers that message in a gripping way. Read this book. It will challenge both your heart and mind. A rare feat.
J.D. Vance, author ofHillbilly Elegy
I knew wed find some good stuff in this neighborhood, said the new owner of our family sofa.
I glared at him as I helped lift it into the bed of his truck at the end of our driveway. He handed me the cash, which I gave to Mom. Ten months earlier, wed moved into a dream house, and now, with my final year of high school about to begin, it was nearly empty. We were having a massive yard salethe biggest Id ever seenwith furnishings from each of the three houses Mom and Shelly had mortgaged.
They explained their new plan to Hannah and me: We would relocate to the Bay Area because there were more job opportunities. This made sense, but I also had the feeling that they wanted to leave Red Bluff to escape the ignominy both of the shooting incident and their ruinous investments in real estate. Mom and Shelly were clearly ready to relocate; they had already found a mobile home in a trailer park in a low-income neighborhood in San Jose. Because they wouldnt have space in their new mobile unit, and because they needed the money, Mom and Shelly sold everything: the boat, one of the cars, the flatscreen TV (a hot-ticket item in 2006), and the furniture. I spent a few days helping with the yard sale, lifting the heavy items, and watching the material goods of our life exchanged for cash.
On the final day, I walked through the house. I felt a sense of vertigo as I registered its emptiness. I walked through the backyard and looked at the sprinkler system I helped install the summer prior, spending several days digging ditches in the scorching heat to lay PVC pipe around the edge of the fence. I looked up at the window of my bedroom on the second floor and wondered what my new room in San Jose would be like. Thinking about the prospect of another move, I realized then that I was not going to leave Red Bluff. I wasnt going with Mom and Shelly.
Where would you stay, hon? Mom asked.
Johns dad says it would be okay if I lived with them, I replied.
I had my arguments ready, mostly focusing on the fact that I only had one year left of high school, and that my friend Johns house would be a suitable and safe place for me. Johns dad was a retired cop and military veteran, and he had already granted me permission to stay with them. He was impressed that Id recently talked my manager at the restaurant into giving John a job as a pizzamaker. He also knew that I had recently urged John to ask a girl from school out, and now they were dating. So Johns dad considered me a positive influence. A low bar, given our friend group.
The year before, I was sleeping over at Johns house, and we decided to go out looking for something fun to do. Sometimes John, Tom, and I would go to the train tracks behind Wal-Mart and play chicken. When we heard a train approaching, wed stand on the tracks. Whoever jumped off the tracks first was the loser. Sometimes the loser would have to cough up more money for beer or buy everyone Taco Bell.
Shortly after he got his license, we took Johns truck on the freeway.
Hell yeah, John said, suddenly swerving the truck onto the dirt on the side of the freeway.
Dude, what are you doing? I asked, looking around from the passengers seat.
Look man, he pointed to the enormous mounds of dirt around us. Dirt jumps.
Lets do it, I said.
The truck was an old Dodge. I dont recall the model, but it did have 4-wheel-drive. John gunned it off a dirt jump but we didnt get much air.
That was pathetic, John said. We need more speed.
John was determined to get all four wheels off the ground no matter what. After a few more false starts, we finally found the right dirt mound and got enough speed to launch into the air. I rolled down the window and looked down at the ground as we achieved liftoff. My stomach dropped, and I quickly gripped the side handle above the window as we descended. We gave no thought to the danger of what we were doing or whether people driving by on the freeway would see us. We focused solely on the thrill.
John and his younger brother Tom, in their aim to get their dad to agree to let me stay, reminded him that I rarely got into serious trouble at school. A more honest statement would have been that I was simply caught less often. When I hung out at their house, Johns dad would sometimes say, If you dont open your mouth, then no one will know youre stupid. John and I had learned on our own that, similarly, if you dont get caught, then no one will know youre a troublemaker.
After a long conversation with Johns dad, Mom agreed I could stay with his family. Shelly and Mom said they believed I was better off in a familiar environment. They also alluded to how small the trailer park in San Jose was, which may have also played a role in their willingness to let me stay in Red Bluff.
To be honest Rob, Shelly said, It might be better for you to live with some guys.
She and Mom had never gotten over me rejecting their offers each time they broached the idea of finding a father figure for me. I was just glad to hear them agree with the plan.
I asked my sister what she was going to do. She was irritated that I even asked, and said that of course she was staying with her dad here in Red Bluff. I was relieved, because that meant I could keep an eye on her as she started high school.
I asked her how she felt about Mom and Shelly moving to San Jose. She shrugged.
They can do whatever they want, she said. Im staying.
Even though he had a background in law enforcement, Johns dad was an extremely laissez faire parent. He worked all the time in his private investigator job and had recently been divorced for the fifth time. From my perspective, he was more of a buddy than a father figurethere was a kind of dont ask, dont tell policy in the house. We could do whatever we wanted, as long as he wasnt made too aware of it. John and Tom told me I was lucky, because their stepmom had just left, and she would not have let me stay with them for a whole year. Plus, their stepbrother had moved out, which freed up a room in the house for me. I asked John and Tom if they missed their stepfamily, and they said no, describing how each time their dad got remarried, they never got too attached to any of their new family members because they didnt expect it to last long. I knew what that was like.
For our final year of high school, John and I took an auto-shop class for first period. We genuinely intended to learn more about cars, but it didnt pan out. Because we usually stayed up all night playing basketball, drinking, playing video games, or figuring out ways to get into trouble, we got to class totally exhausted. The classroom was in a separate campus building, attached to a large repair shop. We typically spent the first few minutes of class answering questions from the textbook, and the rest of class in the shop working on cars. One morning I drove my car onto one of the car lifts in the shop, and John raised it up. I was in the drivers seat and reclined all the way back. I sipped fruit punch-flavored Gatorade (with Vodka mixed in) and fell asleep for the entire class.
John took his car on the lifts too, and we both just slept through class. This became a routine. The teacher eventually caught on to what we were doing and told us to knock it off. Fortunately, he never learned about the drinking.
If you leave a group of 17-year-old boys alone long enough, something will usually happen.
John and I tricked Tyler, my friend who lived with his grandmother, into thinking his car had been stolen. John purposely left something in Tylers car, so he could nonchalantly borrow his car keys to retrieve it. He then handed the keys to me to make a copy at a local key shop. Three days later, John and I took the copied key and parked Tylers car across town. When Tyler discovered that his car was not where hed parked it, he began fuming and shouting, Someone stole my car! John and I barely contained our laughter, giving the game away. Tyler couldnt believe the lengths we went to pull off this little prank.
But sometimes our pranks were more extreme. A few weeks after the car prank, we did something even more gratuitously stupid.
Wheres Max? I asked, looking through Johns fridge for another Keystone light. Maybe my sixth or seventh one that day.
Hes sleeping in his room. He has work tomorrow, John replied.
Max was one of our friends who had moved in with us a few days ago because his dad and stepmom kicked him out.
How can we mess with him? I ask, sipping my beer.
I have fireworks, Tom opened his backpack to show us.
I started going through the kitchen cabinets, searching for the biggest container. I pulled out a Crock-Pot.
Shh. We carefully opened the door and heard Max snoring. John had the Crock-Pot full of fireworks. The plan was to light the fireworks, then lock Max inside his room. Tom had a set of bungee cords ready so that as soon as John and I stepped out, he could secure the door shut from the outside.
We lit the fireworks and, in the excitement, forgot to put the Crock-Pot lid on.
Yoo what the hell! Max yelled.
John and I were giddy, running out of the room. Tom attached the bungee hook to keep the door shut.
THIS IS BULLSHIT!! Max frantically tried to open the door.
The three of us were on the ground laughing. Max eventually managed to open the door. He had burns on his arms and he was holding a pistol with the safety off.
He never aimed the gun at any of us. Nothing more eventful happened that night. He just wanted us to know he was angry and could have killed us if he wanted. We genuinely felt bad for Max, and bought him Taco Bellhis favorite foodto make up for it, and remained close.
This is how my friends and I treated each other, and others. There were plenty of other examples of stupidity. Taking baseball bats to taillights in parking lots. Driving around town shooting pedestrians and bicyclists with Air Soft or paintball guns. Somehow, we had all created a situation where the coolest person was the one who had most recently done the most dangerous thing. Before this fireworks incident, Max held the top spot because he had won a fight against some other kid at a party the weekend before. Hed had his turn at the top, but we couldnt let him stay for long. Now it was his turn to be humiliated.
Our diets were generally a disasterSpaghettiOs, cold pizza, Pepsi, and cheap beer. Taco Bell, Arbys, Burger King, and Chef Boyardee were staples. There was also this amazing local burger joint called Bud's Jolly Kone, but we didnt visit too often because it was a little pricier than other fast food. Occasionally, we would visit a fancy restaurant with cloth napkins like Olive Garden or The Cheesecake Factory. Wed go to Subway if we felt like eating healthy, which wasnt too often. We bought a deep fryer and would go weeks eating only deep-fried chicken strips, jalapeno poppers, and shoe-string French fries or potato wedges.
The cold pizza came from worksometimes the manager would give John and me free food at the end of the night, which we took home for a late dinner.
Despite the free pizzas, I wanted to quit my job at the restaurant. I had grown weary of washing dishes, to the point where the smell of tomato sauce made my stomach turn. I associated it with dirty dishes and half eaten plates of pasta. The only time something exciting happened was when I was washing dishes, heard some glasses shatter, and looked out into the dining area. Two guys I knew from my high school were in a fist fight, and my manager broke it up and told them to leave or hed call the cops.
A few weeks after moving in with John, I interviewed for a new job at a grocery store. They hired me, saying I could start in three weeks. I was so relievedstocking shelves and bagging groceries were not the most glamourous tasks, but they beat scrubbing dishes and trying to get the smell of onions and garlic out of my fingernails.
I was a little nervous about telling my manager at the restaurant that I got a new job at a grocery store. Id always gotten along well with Jim, and goodbyes werent easy for me. So I was surprised at how well he took it.
This is very good, Rob, very good, Jim said. I know no one wants to be sweating their ass off in a steaming hot dish room. This is what you want in life. You want each job you get to be better than the job you had before.
Was there really such a big difference between washing dishes and bagging groceries? Id just moved from one low-paying job to another. But thanks to Jim, I felt I was advancing in the world. I wanted that feeling again.
Between the end of my old job and the start of the new, my sister called.
She explained that a few days before, Mom and Shelly had suddenly arrived at her dads house. They told Hannah to pack up her stuff, announcing that she was moving with them to San Jose. My sister said she had no forewarning of this, and that Mom, Shelly, and her dad had arranged it without asking her. Mom helped her pack a couple of suitcases, and off they went. Mom told Hannah they had already enrolled her in a school in San Jose.
Hannah was in disbelief. She generally preferred living with Mom, but she had not agreed to move to San Jose. She wanted to stay in Red Bluff, and was clearly livid that she had not been given a choice. I knew Mom wanted her to live with them, so I wasnt entirely surprised. But Hannah then went on to say something that did surprise me.
Rob, Ive barely seen Mom this whole week, she said. Shes always over at her friends house and Shelly is always at a casino. I go to school, I come home, and I hardly ever see either of them.
Thats weird, I said. But I doubt it has anything to do with you. It dawned on me that if anything, that situation must have been the same or even worsebeforeHannah moved in with them.
Thats weird, I said. But I doubt it has anything to do with you. It dawned on me that if anything, that situation must have been the same or even worse
Hannah moved in with them.
Have you tried calling or texting Mom? I asked.
I text her all the time. She gets home pretty late, and we talk for a little bit, and then she goes to bed, Hannah replied. I hate it here. I miss our old houseI miss Red Bluff.
Okay. Maybe things will get better. I dont know, I said. Do you want me to come visit?
Yeah, she said. I was actually thinking about running away. Just like getting on a bus or something back to Red Bluff.
Dont do that. Ill be there this weekend.
That week, I was at a party with my friends, and we were sitting around a fire. Someone was playing Forgot About Dre out of his car.
He got out of the drivers seat and walked towards us, pulling out a pipe. It was crank.
A girl sitting next to me said, Oh my god, be careful. That stuff gave me a heart attack a few months ago.
Earlier in the day, we figured we could invite a few people over to the middle of the woods on our friend Nicks parents property. The house was in the middle of nowhere, so we thought we could have some beers, maybe set up a couple tents, and camp out for the night. Nick repeatedly stressed that his parentscould notfind out about what we were doing. They were still in the house.
Earlier in the day, we figured we could invite a few people over to the middle of the woods on our friend Nicks parents property. The house was in the middle of nowhere, so we thought we could have some beers, maybe set up a couple tents, and camp out for the night. Nick repeatedly stressed that his parents
find out about what we were doing. They were still in the house.
Initially, we invited only about 10 people to camp out. But then they texted all their friends, who texted more people, and so on. Pretty soon we were having to direct traffic away from his house so his parents wouldnt see what was happening. By 10pm, more than 60 people arrived, hearing that there was going to be a bonfire. Nick was freaking out, sure his parents were going to see a line of cars all along the property. Somehow, though, they didnt notice anything.
We kept redirecting people further away, half a mile or so from his house, deep into the woods. Some guys started building a campfire.
No! Dont do that, do not do that! Nick shouted. He began pacing back and forth with his hands on his head. My stepdad is going to kill us. Hes definitely going to kill me.
The guys built a huge fire, ignoring Nick. I looked up and saw the smoke climbing up toward the sky. I pointed this out to Nick, and he replied that if his parents glanced out the window and saw smoke then they would definitely call the cops or the fire department. I opened a beer, figuring that if we were going to get into serious trouble soon, we might as well enjoy the party while it lasted.
About two hours later, we were all sitting around the campfire.
Wait, really? I asked the girl next to me, circling back to her story. I didnt believe that people our age could have heart attacks.
Yeah, so I smoked some crystal and had to go to the emergency room, she said.
No, Kate, that is not what happened, her friend sitting nearby said. You bought it from some guy, but it was a bad batch. He told us later that his dealer wanted to like poison him or something. So the dealer gave him a batch that was supposed to kill him. But then the guy thought something was fishy about it, so he just sold it to people instead of smoking it. Kate bought some from him. But it wasnt really a heart attack, she just had trouble breathing.
Sounds horrible, I said, feeling the effects of the alcohol kicking in.
We played a few rounds of beer pong and flip cup and I became progressively more impaired. Tom asked if we could drive home before Nicks parents figured out what was going on.
I might be too smashed, I slurred. Probably not the best idea.
Dude, its not like we can stay at Nicks. And we cant just camp out here. We dont have tents or anything, I forgot to bring one Tom replied. Im not sleeping in dirt! Lets get the fuck out of here.
Yeah okay, I said.
I staggered over to my car and turned on the ignition while Tom got into the passengers seat.
My vision was blurry. Dude, I said, Im going to crash this thing. We are fucked. I slowly drove through the woods, trying to find the main road.
Well be okay, Tom said. He kept grabbing the steering while, trying to keep it steady while I began to doze off.
Im tired, might need a nap on the way, I reclined my seat all the way back.
Robert, what the fuck! was the last thing I heard.
Suddenly I woke up and I was sitting in the back of Johns car. John was driving, Tom was in the passengers seat.
Where are we? I asked.
They explained that Id fallen asleep, and Tom had pulled the car over and called John to pick us up.
Were going to Jack in the Box, John said. We havent eaten since lunch.
I fell asleep again, sprawled across the backseat, and came to in the drive-thru while John was ordering.
He pulled forward to the pick-up window. I was about to vomit. I panicked, trying to figure out how to unlock and open the door but in my current state I couldnt solve the puzzle. I climbed between John and Tom in the front seat and lay across Johns lap. My right elbow pressed against the steering wheel, accidentally honking the horn.
Rob, what the hell are you doing? John said, laughing.
The Jack in the Box employee opened his window to hand us the food. I grabbed the bag from him and threw it behind me. After making eye contact with the employee, I leaned forward and puked up about 12 beers. I glanced blearily to my left and saw the driver in the car behind us, then looked down at the giant puddle as the car behind us backed up and drove away.
The weekend was approaching, and I needed money to see my sister in San Jose. I was between jobs, and the money from my dishwashing job went to car insurance, gas, Johns dad for rent. I poorly budgeted anything leftover. I bought booze, fast food, new clothes, whatever I felt like. Without a short-term, concrete, goal to save for (like a car) I just blew my money without a second thought. At this point, the future didnt yet feel real to me, So why save for another day?
I arrived at school and met up with Tyler in the high school parking lot. He explained that his grandma was really sick.
Like, seriously bad. First it was just a cough, but now she has pneumonia or something, Tyler said.
How old is she? I asked.
Hell if I know. Seventy-something. My grandpa was almost 70 when he died. I was in like fifth grade, he replied.
That sucks man, I hope she gets better.
Eh whatever. I dont give a shit. Kinda hoping it happens.
What the hell. Are you serious?
I dont know. Maybe.
Since we were talking about family issues, I told him about how my sister had unexpectedly called me and how she wanted me to visit her.
The problem is, I said. I dont really have enough to make the 8-hour round trip. Gas isnt cheap.
Tyler reached into his pocket and pulled out a wad of cash. Not sure how much is there, but it should be enough, he said.
He got into his car and drove away. I didnt know where he was headed, but clearly not class.
I unfolded the bills Tyler gave me. Twenty-eight bucksmore than enough.
The following day, though, I received yet another unexpected call. Then I had to give Tyler his money back.
Id just finished my first day of work. I came to like this new job because of my manager, a guy named Mike. He was in his thirties, but had a PlayStation 3 and wore Heelys, which were black sneakers with a small retractable wheel installed in the outsole. Mike would glide up and down the aisles asking grocery shoppers if he could help them find anything, and to check on me and the other new employees.
Right away, I noticed the prices here were significantly higher than at the store Mom and Shelly would visit across town.
Just before my shift ended, I asked, Hey Mike, why would anyone shop here? You can get a lot of the same stuff at FoodMaxx for like half the price.
Thats true bro, but who shops here? Mike asked.
Uh, I saw one of my teachers here when I started my shift.
Right. Our shoppers are white-collar people who dont mind spending a little more to feel classy.
I was thinking about this idea when my phone started vibrating. I pulled it out and saw five missed calls from Mom and Shelly. My shift was over, so I thanked Mike and walked out into the parking lot. I sat on the hood of my car and called them back.
Shelly immediately picked up and said, Rob, Im not abandoning you.
She wasnt making sense. She was sobbing, and kept saying that she would always love me, and that she would never abandon me.
I had no idea what was going on. But I knew something awful was about to happen.
Mom took the phone from Shelly. Hon, can you hear me?
Yes, I masked my fear with as much bravado as I could muster. Whats happening? Is Hannah okay? I asked.
Your sister is fine. Look, hon, Mom paused. Shelly and I have been having somedisagreements. Ever since we moved to San Jose. But we both want you to know that we love you and Hannah both very much.
Okay, what does that meanyou guys are splitting up? I asked.
We dont know whats going to happen yet. We just want you to know we love you and your sister, Mom said.
I hung up, wondering if they were really going to separate. I lit a cigarette and read a text from my sister. She said that she hadnt seen Mom or Shelly at home for a week, that Mom was driving her back to live with her dad in Red Bluff, and that she couldnt wait to leave San Jose.
If Mom decided Hannah should live with her dad,that means Mom and Shelly are definitely splitting up.

I had never before heard Shelly cry like that, not even when she was recovering from her injury. I had a feeling they thought having Hannah move in would help repair their relationship, but all it did was give her a front row seat to watch it dissolve. I couldnt believe they were separating. After everything that had happened, my family was coming apart again. Even though I no longer lived with them, just knowing Mom and Shelly were together gave me a sense of security. Now, that was gone.
I sat in the parking lot smoking for a long time after that.
It was getting latealmost eleven oclock. I opened the trunk of my car and glanced at the disarray of books Id picked up from the library that morning. I grabbed my aluminum baseball bat that was next to them.
For as long as I could remember, I felt a constant undercurrent of throbbing rage, along with anxiety and shame (which I sometimes mistook for rage), but I was incapable of understanding it or communicating it. I was so overwhelmed by emotions I didnt understand that I acted impulsively just to prove to myself and others that I wasnt weak. Id once read that when an animal gets hurt, they know they are vulnerable and that predators will target them, so they are prone to lash out at the slightest sign of danger.
I gripped the bat and smashed the taillights of a nearby car in the parking lot. I was still wearing my work clothes and realized that someone might notice. I grabbed a gym shirt from my car, still soaked in sweat from an earlier weight-lifting session, and changed.
I walked to another car in the parking lot across the street, where I thought Id be less recognizable. It took two careful swings to shatter its windshield. I was careful because Id seen a kid from school try to break a windshield once and the bat bounced off the car, rebounding and hitting him in the face.
I saw someone walking by. I considered whether to flee the scene or try to intimidate the person into silence. Flight or fight. I was relieved to see it was just an elderly man.
I wonder what your parents would say if they saw you doing that, he said softly.
I wonder if I care, I sneered.
Driving home that night, I stopped at a red light at a four-way intersection, a gray SUV pulled up next to me.
Hey! the driver yelled. You need to slow the fuck down. You blew through a stop sign back there.
Who gives a shit, I shouted back. Its late. There arent any cars around, moron.
I flipped him off and drove away.
Even though Antonio was my only friend who lived with his biological mom and dad, they were mostly checked out, and didnt seem to care much about his homework or grades. As long as he did well enough to stay on the football team, his parents seemed to be happy. He was the tallest and most athletic of our friend group and played on the high school team with Tom. He stayed over at our place a lot, and wed play basketball and video games. John and I had bought some boxing gloves, so wed go into the backyard and hold boxing sessions with guys from our high school.
We were in the backyard when Antonio explained to us that his football coach thought he might be good enough to be recruited to play football in college, maybe at Sacramento State. My other friends and I had always thought that Antonio would be the most likely of us to actually go to college. But he had recently failed one of his classes and had to make it up by going to a class during spring break.
Thats just a two-week class, right? I asked. Should be easy.
Yeah man, but I have to get like a B or B-plus I think to keep my GPA high enough, Antonio said.
Antonio attended for the first few days, but the second week he stopped going. Instead, hed either hang out with his girlfriend or with us.
He was staying over that week with Tom, John, and me at our place.
We were hanging out in Johns room watching The Departed when Tom suddenly asked where Antonio was.
Where did he go? Tom sounded nervous.
Probably went to the bathroom or to talk to his girlfriend or something, I suggested.
Bullshit! Tom shouted and ran down the hallway.
John and I laughed as we heard Tom pounding on his bedroom door.
Antonio, Tom said, Open this fucking door!
John and I looked at each other, wondering why Antonio had locked himself inside Toms bedroom.
Hey, Antonio, is everything okay? I shouted.
Fuck off guys, Im almost done, Antonio replied.
John laughed. Hes jerking off in there.
No! Tom cried, and kicked his door open.
Antonio frantically pulled up his gym shorts. We walked in. I glanced at the TV, seeing that he was playing a DVD of some American Pie sequel. John and I walked out, laughing while Tom and Antonio yelled at each other.
Why the fuck were you jacking off in my room? Why not the bathroom? Tom shouted.
I cant play a DVD in the bathroom, Tom Antonio said. Use your head, think about it.
Promise you wont jack off in my room again, Tom said. Or Ill jack off all over your sheets the next time I stay over.
Goddammit Tom! Antonio stood up and punched the wall. We grew silent when we saw that he had left a big hole.
Dude, are you serious, John said. Our dad is going to be pissed.
Oh shit oh shit oh shit, Antonio said. Im supposed to be in school right now. He cant tell my parents about this.
Antonio and Tom left the room, while John and I continued watching the movie. Twenty minutes later Antonio handed me a hammer.
I found this in the garage, Rob.
Okay, I said. Are you gonna smash another hole in the wall?
I need you to do me a favor, he said, trying to get me to take the hammer. I want you to use this to break my toe.
I started laughing. Are you high? What the hell is going on today?
No man, look, I have a plan, Antonio explained. Im going to say Tom and I got into an argument, and I got so mad I kicked the coffee table and broke my toe, and then, because of the pain, I punched a hole in the wall.
John paused the movie and said, That is by far the dumbest thing Ive ever heard. You and Tom are straight up retarded, but I still figured you guys would come up with a better story than that. I want to break your toe just for being stupid. Rob, give me the hammer.
Guys, my parents think Im in school right now, Antonio said. They sort of know I havent gone every day but if they find out I was here and punched a hole in your wall they will lose it.
I shook my head. We heard a car pull up and Tom ran to the window, Fuck guys, my dads here. We saw that he was sitting in his truck in the driveway.
Whys he just sitting there? I asked.
He probably heard us! Tom said.
What are you talking about? I asked.
Sometimes dad says he has microphones installed around the house because hes never home but wants to make sure were not doing anything stupid. I can never tell if hes joking or not. He probably heard us! Tom said, pacing and panicking.
Antonio gripped the hammer and looked at his foot. Its not too late. If he didnt actually hear us. Its not too late. I could do this myself, he said, trying to amp himself up.
John egged him on, Do it pussy.
Then his dad walked into the house.
Okay okay, were sorry! Tom blurted out.
Sorry for what? his dad asked.
Shut up! Antonio said. We dont know what he knows!
Tom broke down and told the whole story. Antonio stood next to him, hanging his head in shame. John and I burst into laughter every few seconds.
At first, their dad looked serious, but slowly smiled, then started chuckling. I agree with John and Rob, then. You two are the biggest idiots in California. Youre going to help me patch up that wall.
Antonio opened his report card a few weeks later, hoping hed somehow earned a B. He got a C, was kicked off the football team, and never went to college.
My new job required employees to wear solid black shoes. Fortunately, there was a Payless right next to the grocery store. I bought the cheapest size 11s from the clearance rack for $19.99. These turned out to be wildly uncomfortable. It wasnt just that I had to bag itemsthe store also had carry out service, meaning we walked customers groceries to their cars for them. The job also required stocking shelves, sweeping and mopping, cleaning spills, and collecting carts around the parking lot in the scorching 100-degree weather. These cheap shoes became gooey in the heat and provided little support. I mentioned this to Johns dad.
Well, I have some Dr. Scholls inserts in a pair of boots I dont wear anymore, he replied. You could pull them out, see if they help.
I thanked him and pulled out the boot soles. They were for a size 13, so I had to carefully cut around the edges to get them to fit into my shoes. They helped a little; my feet hurt less at the end of long shifts.
In the meantime, Tyler and I had been thinking about what we wanted to do after high school.
We were in the school parking lot again. Ive been thinking about it for a while, bro. Its not like Im going to college, Tyler said. He explained to me that hed made an appointment to visit the Air Force Recruiting Office downtown.
One time I told my moms friend that I was thinking about joining the military, I replied. She was like, Thats stupid! Were in the middle of two warsdo you want to get your ass shot off?
Tyler laughed. Whatever. People get shot here too. Did you hear about Enrique?
What about him? I asked.
Dude. You dont know? Edgars brother got shot.
What the fuckare you serious?
Yeah, he was like trying to join a gang or something. He had to do deliveries and shit for them. For part of the initiation he had to play Russian roulette and, well, yeah.
I shook my head in disbelief. I knew Enrique was trying to join a gang last school year, but hadnt heard that hed been shot. Id known him and Edgar since grade school. Enrique used to part his hair on the side and get good grades. He even tucked his shirt in. I rarely talked to Edgar anymore but saw him around school sometimes. He was naturally a big kid but Id noticed hed recently put on a lot more weight. I wondered whether that was because of what happened to his brother.
I tagged along with Tyler to the recruiter, who gave him a bunch of brochures and helped him schedule a time to take some kind of standardized exam for the military.
The recruiter turned to me and said, So how about you? You could join Tyler here to take the test on the same day together. Theres no obligation or anything, but youll learn which jobs you qualify for.
I flipped through a pamphlet, looking at the images of service members in their dress blues. I thought they looked sharp. I didnt see myself like that.
Im not interested, I replied.
Johns dad was telling me about his experiences in the Air Force, and how it had helped him. It might be a good choice for you. Has Tyler said what branch hes joining?
No. Hes been talking to the Army and Air Force.
Well, he can come talk to me if he wants.
Johns dad wasnt the only one who supported the idea of enlisting. Id told my history teacher, whom I liked as far as teachers went, that I sometimes thought about the military. On his computer, he pulled up an old photograph of himself wearing an Air Force flight suit.
Are you thinking about community college? Thats where a lot of kids in this class tend to go, my history teacher said.
Id noticed the difference between the two history classes he taught. Really, this difference existed for every subject at school. There was one class for kids going to four-year colleges, and one for the kids going to community college or not continuing education at all. By this point, my grades had dropped low enough that I was no longer in the prep classes.
I dont know, I told my teacher. I dont like school.
You might later. Not many kids are reading books from the library instead of doing their homework. The military might be a good option for you in the meantime.
By this point, after never knowing my birth father and being rejected by my adoptive father, some part of me was seeking guidance from an older male. Between Johns dad and my teacher, I began to take the idea of enlisting seriously.
In addition to visiting the school library, I spent several days a week in the campus weight room instead of going to class. I figured if enlisting was a real possibility, then I should be strong. Tyler and I ditched our classes and worked out. We also signed up for a local gym and challenged each other to lift more than the other guy. It was a competition. Bench press, squats, snatch and clean, incline bench. Wed go to the clearance rack at the local GNC to buy their cheapest creatine and whey protein powder. After a few months, I gained around 20 pounds of muscle, plus a little fat too because of how I ate at Johns place.
One day I texted Tyler, asking why he wasnt at the gym at our usual time, and asked him if hed taken that test to join the military. He responded by asking me to come over to his house. He and his grandma lived out in the middle of nowhere, on the outskirts of town near the Sacramento Riverendless trees, grass, and dirt roads.
So howd the test go man? I asked.
Didnt go. Not going to, he replied.
Whatwhy not?
Tyler glared at me. His eyes were bloodshot.
She died. My grandma is fucking dead, Tyler said.
Damn. I paused for a few seconds, unsure how to respond. So I just said, Im sorry man. Tylers grandma had been sick for months. We both hoped she would get better, despite Tylers twisted jokes about hoping shed die. I figured that was just his way of dealing with the possibility that she wouldnt be around much longer. What about your uncle, are you moving in with him?
Who the fuck knows. Who fucking cares.
I was about to ask Tyler if his mom or dad had said anything, but thought better of it. As far as I knew, he hadnt talked to either of them in years.
Tyler went into the house and came out with a bottle of Captain Morgan rum and a 2-liter bottle of Shasta Cola. We blasted songs by The Offspring while we sat outside on an old wooden picnic table and got drunk. I texted John, who replied that he would join us soon.
I looked warily at the cliff about 15 feet away from us. I walked over and looked down. The view was covered by tree branches and thick shrubbery, so I couldnt tell how far down it went.
Tyler, to avoid talking about how he was feeling about his grandma, was telling me about his job at the local car wash, and how they were going to give him a raise. In the distance, we saw a group of stray dogs, their fur covered in grime, their tails wagging. They paced toward us. Tyler stood up and all but one of the dogs took off running. Tyler leaned down to the one who remained, petting it. Then he stood up and kicked it, and the dog yelped in pain. I ran over and shoved Tyler away.
What the hell is your problem? I said.
Fuck off, he grabbed the rum bottle, took two quick swigs, and started coughing.
I felt bad for him. I thought of how I felt when I learned Shelly had been shot and figured Tyler must be feeling something like that. Maybe worse, because his grandma had actually died.
We looked over at the dog sniffing around the edge of the cliff.
All of a sudden, Tyler ran over and kicked it again. It felt like time stopped as I watched that dog launch into the air and then plummet down the cliff. I ran over and looked down. I couldnt see what happened through the thickets of branches, but I had serious doubts it survived that drop.
What the fuck I said, in disbelief.
Itsa fuckingdog, Tyler said slowly. My grandma just died, and youre more upset about a dog.
Enraged, I grabbed him by the shirt and pulled him close. Fuck you, I said. It should be you down there, I pointed toward the cliff.
John pulled up in his truck just then, and shouted, Yo, is everything okay?
I got in my car and drove away.
Did he really just kick a fucking dog off a fucking cliff?I sped through the highway. Id always known Tyler was crazier than the rest of us. A couple years before, we were hanging out in a large old shed next to Tylers house with John and Cristian. Tyler spotted a bird fluttering around the tall shelves near the ceiling. He closed the door so that the bird couldnt escape. Then he grabbed a rake and started chasing the bird around. John reluctantly joined him while Cristian and I sat silently.
I sped through the highway. Id always known Tyler was crazier than the rest of us. A couple years before, we were hanging out in a large old shed next to Tylers house with John and Cristian. Tyler spotted a bird fluttering around the tall shelves near the ceiling. He closed the door so that the bird couldnt escape. Then he grabbed a rake and started chasing the bird around. John reluctantly joined him while Cristian and I sat silently.
After twenty minutes or so, they wore the bird out from the chase. Tyler sat quietly in a dark corner of the shed. The bird landed next to him. Tyler snatched the bird and ran outside.
What should we do with it? Tyler asked. He suggested getting some of his grandmas hairspray and a lighter to make a flamethrower.
Cristian glanced at me. Neither of us were okay with this. John looked interested, but I had a feeling he could be talked out of it.
Were not doing anything with it, I said. You caught it, I nodded, acknowledging that I found it impressive. But lets just let it go.
Are you serious? Fuck that. Were scorching this thing, right Cristian? John?
Cristian shook his head and walked away.
John said, Eh, I dont know man. If these guys arent down then maybe not.
Lame, Tyler said as he threw the bird into the air. It flew away.
I thought about this as I drove down Highway 36. Then a car zoomed up behind me.
I gripped my rearview mirror, worried that it might be a copI was definitely drunk. I saw that it was just a gray SUV driven by a chubby looking guy wearing sunglasses. I was pretty sure this was the same guy who yelled at me at the four-way intersection a couple weeks back. Whatever. I kept driving.
The guy started flashing his headlights, then his high beams, at me. He pressed on his horn.What the fuck is this guys problem?I thought. I pulled off to the side of the road and he pulled up next to me.
The guy started flashing his headlights, then his high beams, at me. He pressed on his horn.
I thought. I pulled off to the side of the road and he pulled up next to me.
Yo, you need to slow down motherfucker. I remember you from before. Youre the kid who blew through that stop sign by Wal-Mart.
Fuck off, I said.
He looked down at the backseat of my car and saw my work clothes.
You work there? I can get you firedI know the owner there, he said.
I was afraid. Afraid of losing my job. Scared this guy was going to call the cops. Afraid that Mom and Shelly would find out that Id been drinking and driving.
Go fuck yourself, I said.
He opened his door. The fuck did you say? How old are you anyway?
Old enough to beat your fat ass, I stepped out too.
We got into a shoving match while he kept saying he would get me fired and I kept saying I didnt give a fuck.
This guy was plump, so his shoves were more effective than mine. Plus, my balance wasnt especially good since Id been drinking all day. He pushed me to the ground. Enraged, I got up and punched him in the face, which turned him around a little, but he stayed on his feet. He tackled me. I could hear cars whizzing past as we rolled around like two idiots in the dried-out grass on the side of the road.
While he was still on the ground, I managed to get on my feet before him and land a few kicks on his head. His nose started bleeding. I was wearing shortsblood splattered across my legs. As I stopped to catch my breath, he staggered to his car. He opened the drivers side door, holding it to steady himself.
I walked over, gripped his door and slammed it against him as hard as I could.
I thought about Tyler and that stupid fucking dog. I slammed the door against this guy six or seven more times until he finally buckled and screamed at me to stop.
I looked in his car and noticed there was a little stuffed giraffe and toy cars scattered on the floor.
Dude, you have kids and youre getting into fights on the side of the road? I asked.
Fuck you, he replied. Dont talk about my fucking kids.
I walked back to my car and watched him drive away.
The thrill of the moment dissipated, and my anxiety resurfaced. Rum and cheap cola gurgled in my stomach. I leaned against my car and threw up on the side of the highway. As I wiped my mouth I considered what Id just done: raced through the street drunk out of my mind, called some guy fat because I was angry at him for telling me to slow down, and then beat the shit out of him on the side of the road.
For the rest of the week, I waited in dread. Every time I saw my manager at work, I thought that he knew what had happened. But nothing came of it. Eventually, a coworker mentioned that someone had called to complain that one of the store employees had been speeding.
I felt my phone vibrating. It was a text from Shelly, saying she was visiting Red Bluff soon and asked if Hannah and I would have lunch with her.
At lunch, Shelly tried to put on a brave face. Mom had officially entered a new relationship with a woman she had met in San Jose, and they had recently moved in together. This was the woman Hannah had told me aboutthe one Mom was always visiting when Hannah had briefly lived in San Jose.
Seeing Shelly without Mom made it more real for me that they were truly separated. For Shelly, the wounds from the separation were still fresh. I thought how strange it was that this had all happened because of a freak accident four years ago. The shooting led to the insurance windfall, which led to the housing investments, which led to foreclosures, which led to Mom and Shelly moving to San Jose, which was where Mom had met her new partner.
After lunch, Shelly drove Hannah and me to meet Mom, who was also in town. On the way, Shelly picked up two of her friends. We said goodbye to Shelly and her friends and met up with Mom and her new partner at the movie theater.
Mom and her partner, along with Hannah and I, were standing in line to get tickets. Suddenly we heard yelling in the parking lot. I turned my head. Shelly was running toward us, clearly enraged, shouting, How could you do this to me? HOW THE FUCK COULD YOU DO THIS?
Shellys friends ran toward her and held her back. Mom and her partner walked into the theater quickly. Hannah froze, unsure what to do.
I walked to Shelly.
Im sorry youre going through this, I said. My voice broke up. I had never seen Shelly like this before.
She looked up at me. I just miss your mom, Rob. Im sorry. Go. Tell your sister Im sorry about this.
I embraced Shelly as she shook with rage and anguish, familiar feelings I often tried to block. It dawned on me that adults feel emotional pain, too. I thought about how even though I was technically bordering on adulthood, I wouldnt suddenly become invulnerable. Maybe Id just gotten better at ignoring it or hiding my feelings.Maybe all adults get better at this. They could appear perfectly fine, even when experiencing internal agony.
I embraced Shelly as she shook with rage and anguish, familiar feelings I often tried to block. It dawned on me that adults feel emotional pain, too. I thought about how even though I was technically bordering on adulthood, I wouldnt suddenly become invulnerable. Maybe Id just gotten better at ignoring it or hiding my feelings.
. They could appear perfectly fine, even when experiencing internal agony.
Walking back into the theater, I thought about how after graduation, I wouldnt have the option to go back home to Mom and Shelly, because I never lived in San Jose, and because they lived apart now anyway.
My mind flashed back to that military recruiter I talked to.
Pre-Order Your Copy of Troubled
Pre-Order Your Copy of Troubled
Please write a short review/reaction andpost it here on this form. Or, if you prefer, you can also email me your review (rob@robkhenderson.com).
Please write a short review/reaction and
. Or, if you prefer, you can also email me your review (rob@robkhenderson.com).
Comments
Restacks
Annie Gottlieb
Annie Gottlieb
The Big No
The Big No
The Big No
Dec 28, 2023
This book is a just and savage indictment of a whole generation of irresponsible, selfish adultsit can only be my generation, the baby boomers.
This book is a just and savage indictment of a whole generation of irresponsible, selfish adultsit can only be my generation, the baby boomers.
OK, not a WHOLE generation. As you point out, the more highly educated liberal cohort of the generation preached "liberation" but did not practice it. We still had 1950s, "Greatest Generation" values programmed into our foundation, and for most, whatever "liberation" we dabbled in did not dislodge those values or seriously damage us or derail our later normie lives. Of course, there were casualties even thenaddiction, drug-triggered schizophrenia. And even among the educated, divorce became commonplace. We married, yestoo early, maybebut we also then divorced in pursuit of self-actualization. Our kids' generation (my siblings' and friends' kids, I don't have any), scarred by (sometimes serial) divorce, don't make adult commitments till around age 30, which seems wise. They try to go through most of their experimental changes before having kidsbut that is also largely a class luxury. They are equipped and positioned to take their place as achievers and homeowners, with parental backing, often Greatest grandparental financial backing. Except at the highest levels, that money is running out.
OK, not a WHOLE generation. As you point out, the more highly educated liberal cohort of the generation preached "liberation" but did not practice it. We still had 1950s, "Greatest Generation" values programmed into our foundation, and for most, whatever "liberation" we dabbled in did not dislodge those values or seriously damage us or derail our later normie lives. Of course, there were casualties even thenaddiction, drug-triggered schizophrenia. And even among the educated, divorce became commonplace. We married, yestoo early, maybebut we also then divorced in pursuit of self-actualization. Our kids' generation (my siblings' and friends' kids, I don't have any), scarred by (sometimes serial) divorce, don't make adult commitments till around age 30, which seems wise. They try to go through most of their experimental changes before having kidsbut that is also largely a class luxury. They are equipped and positioned to take their place as achievers and homeowners, with parental backing, often Greatest grandparental financial backing. Except at the highest levels, that money is running out.
Like (5)
Reply
Share
Sarah
Sarah
Onward and Repeat
Onward and Repeat
Onward and Repeat
Dec 28, 2023
Rob, thank you for mentioning that your mom and Shelley recognized the importance of positive male models for a teenage boy.  Though it comes from a well-meaning place (the desire not to shame single mothers or lesbian couples) the idea that men and women contribute the same things to a boy or girl's upbrining seems false, both empirically and evidentially.  This seems to be due at least in part to biology (Men and women processing oxytocin while interacting with children in different ways) and not just socially constructed.  There is no shame in acknowledging that one person can not be everything to everyone.  I was indispensable to my children as infants and as they grow my husband will play a more active role, particularly in play (as they get bigger, though I'm not slight, it's more fun to wrestle with dad who can do more, more safely than I can).  We have to balance when discussing parenthood and children, to acknowle that certain things are beneficial and helping all parents acquire those and communicating this in such a way as not to shame or paralyze parents struggling to provide them (which is usually a result of a person's desire to signal superiority).  I believe this is particularly important for mothers who for various reasons (less encouragement/stress relief from extended family, more exposure to non-peer influences, more access to info on all the evils or world, likely and imaginary) are particularly susceptible to low self-efficacy.
Rob, thank you for mentioning that your mom and Shelley recognized the importance of positive male models for a teenage boy.  Though it comes from a well-meaning place (the desire not to shame single mothers or lesbian couples) the idea that men and women contribute the same things to a boy or girl's upbrining seems false, both empirically and evidentially.  This seems to be due at least in part to biology (Men and women processing oxytocin while interacting with children in different ways) and not just socially constructed.  There is no shame in acknowledging that one person can not be everything to everyone.  I was indispensable to my children as infants and as they grow my husband will play a more active role, particularly in play (as they get bigger, though I'm not slight, it's more fun to wrestle with dad who can do more, more safely than I can).  We have to balance when discussing parenthood and children, to acknowle that certain things are beneficial and helping all parents acquire those and communicating this in such a way as not to shame or paralyze parents struggling to provide them (which is usually a result of a person's desire to signal superiority).  I believe this is particularly important for mothers who for various reasons (less encouragement/stress relief from extended family, more exposure to non-peer influences, more access to info on all the evils or world, likely and imaginary) are particularly susceptible to low self-efficacy.
Looking forward to my copy of the book!
Looking forward to my copy of the book!
Like (5)
Reply
Share
Top
Latest
Discussions

Rob Henderson

Rob Henderson

Rob Henderson

Rob Henderson

Rob Henderson

Rob Henderson

Rob Henderson

Rob Henderson

Rob Henderson

Rob Henderson


undefined subscriptions will be displayed on your profile (edit)
Skip for now
For your security, we need to re-authenticate you.
Click the link we sent to sasha.p.podolsky@gmail.com, orclick here to sign in.
Info
Shopping








0:00/5:15

0:00
/
5:15


